---
title: "Tip of the Week #101: Return Values, References, and Lifetimes"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/101
type: markdown
order: "101"
---

Originally posted as totw/101 on 2015-07-29

By Titus Winters (titus@google.com)

Consider the following code snippet:

```c++
const string& name = obj.GetName();
std::unique_ptr<Consumer> consumer(new Consumer(name));
```

In particular, I'd like to draw your attention to the `&`. Is it appropriate?
What should we check? What can go wrong? I find a decent number of C++
programmers that aren't entirely clear on references, but do generally know that
they "avoid making copies." As with most issues in C++, it's more complicated
than that.

## Case by Case: What is Being Returned and How is it Being Stored?

There are two (maybe three) important questions here:

1.  What type is returned (in this example, by `GetName()`)?
1.  What type are we storing into/initializing (in this example, what is the
    type of `name`)?
1.  If we are returning a reference, does the object being returned by reference
    have any lifetime limitations?

We'll continue with `string` as our example type, but the same arguments
generalize for most non-trivial value types.

1.  Returning `string`, initializing `string`: This is usually
    [RVO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Return_value_optimization) and is
    guaranteed to be, at worst, a move for modern types (See [TotW
    77](/tips/77)).
2.  Returning `string&` or `const string&`, initializing `string`: This is a
    copy (there must be some long-living object which we are returning a
    reference to, so once we initialize a new string there are two names for
    that data, hence a copy. See [TotW 77](/tips/77)). Sometimes this is
    valuable, like if you need your `string` to outlast the lifetime guarantees
    provided by the function.
3.  Returning `string`, initializing `string&`: This won't compile, as you
    cannot bind a reference to a temporary.
4.  Returning `const string&`, initializing `string&`: This won't compile, as
    you've dropped the const inappropriately.
5.  Returning `const string&`, initializing `const string&`: This is no cost
    (you're effectively returning just a pointer). However, you have inherited
    any existing lifetime restrictions: how long is that reference good for?
    Most accessor methods that return a reference are returning a member - at
    most, the reference can be valid for the life of the containing object.
6.  Returning `string&`, initializing `string&`: This is the same as #5, but
    with the additional caveat: the returned reference is non-const, so any
    modifications to your reference will be reflected in the source.
7.  Returning `string&`, initializing `const string&`: The same as #5.
8.  Returning `string`, initializing `const string&`: You'd think, given #3,
    that this wouldn't work. However, the language has special-case support for
    this: if you initialize a `const T&` with a temporary `T`, that `T` (in this
    case `string`) is not destroyed until the *reference* goes out of scope (in
    the common case of automatic or static variables).

Scenario \#8 is what allows most reflexive use of references (that is "Oh, I
don't want to copy so I'll just assign into a reference" without necessarily
thinking about what is being returned). However, because of \#1, it's also
not really doing anything for you: there probably wouldn't have been a copy in
the first place. Further, now readers of your code have to contend with your
local variable being of type `const string&` instead of `string`, and thus worry
about whether the underlying `string` has gone out of scope or changed.

Put another way: when code reviewing the original snippet, I have to worry
about:

*   Is `GetName()` returning by value or by reference?
*   Does the constructor for `Consumer` take `string`, `const string&` or
    `string_view`?
*   Does the constructor have any lifetime requirements placed on that
    parameter? (If it isn't just `string`.)

However, if you just declare `name` as `string` in the first place, it's
generally no less efficient (because of RVO and move semantics), and at least as
likely to be safe with respect to object lifetimes.

Additionally, if there is an object lifetime issue, it's often simpler to spot
when storing as `string`: rather than looking at the interplay between the
lifetime promise of `GetName()`'s returned reference and the lifetime
requirements of `SetName()`, having your own `string` means only having to look
at the local code and `SetName()`.

All of which is to say: avoiding copies is fine, so long as you're not making
things more complicated. Making code more complicated when there wasn't a copy
in the first place is not a good tradeoff.
