---
title: "Tip of the Week #122: Test Fixtures, Clarity, and Dataflow"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
permalink: tips/122
published: true
type: markdown
---

Originally published August 30, 2016

*By Titus Winters [(titus@google.com)](mailto:titus@google.com)*

Updated Oct 20, 2017

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/122](https://abseil.io/tips/122)

*Be obscure clearly.* — E.B. White

How does test code differ from production code? For one thing, tests are
untested: when you write messy spaghetti code that is spread over several files
and has hundreds of lines of `SetUp` how can anyone be sure that the test is
really testing what it needs to? Too often your code reviewers will have to
assume that the setup makes sense and are at best spot-checking the logic for
each individual test case. In those cases, your test is likely to fail if
something changes, but it's rarely clear whether that something is the right
something.

On the other hand, if you keep each test simple and as straightforward as
possible, it's easier to see that it is correct by inspection, understand the
logic, and review for higher quality test logic. Let's look at a few simple ways
to achieve that.

## Dataflow in Fixtures

Consider the following example:

```c++
class FrobberTest : public ::testing::Test {
 protected:
  void ConfigureExampleA() {
    example_ = "Example A";
    frobber_.Init(example_);
    expected_ = "Result A";
  }

  void ConfigureExampleB() {
    example_ = "Example B";
    frobber_.Init(example_);
    expected_ = "Result B";
  }

  Frobber frobber_;
  string example_;
  string expected_;
};

TEST_F(FrobberTest, CalculatesA) {
  ConfigureExampleA();
  string result = frobber_.Calculate();
  EXPECT_EQ(result, expected_);
}

TEST_F(FrobberTest, CalculatesB) {
  ConfigureExampleB();
  string result = frobber_.Calculate();
  EXPECT_EQ(result, expected_);
}
```

In this fairly simple example, our tests span 30 lines of code. It's very easy
to imagine less simple examples that are 10x that: certainly more than will fit
on any single screen. A reader or code reviewer that wants to validate that the
code is correct has to scan around as follows:

* "OK, this is a FrobberTest, where's that defined ... oh, this file. Great."
* "`ConfigureExampleA` ... that's a FrobberTest method. It's operating on some
  member variables. What types are those? How are they initialized? OK,
  Frobber and two strings. Is there a `SetUp`? OK, default constructed."
* "Back to the test: OK, we calculate a result and compare it against
  `expected_` ... what did we store there again?"

Compare to the equivalent code written in a simpler style:

```c++
TEST(FrobberTest, CalculatesA) {
  Frobber frobber;
  frobber.Init("Example A");
  EXPECT_EQ(frobber.Calculate(), "Result A");
}

TEST(FrobberTest, CalculatesB) {
  Frobber frobber;
  frobber.Init("Example B");
  EXPECT_EQ(frobber.Calculate(), "Result B");
}
```

With this style, even in a world where we have hundreds of tests, we can tell
with only local information exactly what is going on.

## Prefer Free Functions

In the previous example, all of the variable initialization was nice and terse.
In real tests, that isn't always true. However, the same ideas about dataflow
and avoiding fixtures may apply. Consider this protobuf example:

```c++
class BobberTest : public ::testing::Test {
 protected:
  void SetUp() override {
    bobber1_ = PARSE_TEXT_PROTO(R"(
        id: 17
        artist: "Beyonce"
        when: "2012-10-10 12:39:54 -04:00"
        price_usd: 200)");
    bobber2_ = PARSE_TEXT_PROTO(R"(
        id: 21
        artist: "The Shouting Matches"
        when: "2016-08-24 20:30:21 -04:00"
        price_usd: 60)");
  }

  BobberProto bobber1_;
  BobberProto bobber2_;
};

TEST_F(BobberTest, UsesProtos) {
  Bobber bobber({bobber1_, bobber2_});
  SomeCall();
  EXPECT_THAT(bobber.MostRecent(), EqualsProto(bobber2_));
}
```

Again, the centralized refactoring leads to a lot of indirection: declarations
and initialization are separate, and potentially far away from actual use.
Further, because of `SomeCall()` in the middle, and the fact we're using a
fixture and fixture member variables, there's no way to be *sure* that
`bobber1_` and `bobber2_` weren't modified between initialization and the
`EXPECT_THAT` validation, without checking the details of `SomeCall()`. More
scrolling around is likely necessary.

Consider instead:

```c++
BobberProto RecentCheapConcert() {
  return PARSE_TEXT_PROTO(R"(
      id: 21
      artist: "The Shouting Matches"
      when: "2016-08-24 20:30:21 -04:00"
      price_usd: 60)");
}
BobberProto PastExpensiveConcert() {
  return PARSE_TEXT_PROTO(R"(
      id: 17
      artist: "Beyonce"
      when: "2012-10-10 12:39:54 -04:00"
      price_usd: 200)");
}

TEST(BobberTest, UsesProtos) {
  Bobber bobber({PastExpensiveConcert(), RecentCheapConcert()});
  SomeCall();
  EXPECT_THAT(bobber.MostRecent(), EqualsProto(RecentCheapConcert()));
}
```

Moving the initialization into free functions makes it clear that there is no
hidden dataflow. Well chosen names for the helpers mean that you can likely
review the test for correctness without even scrolling up to see the details of
the helper.

## Five Easy Steps

You can generally improve test clarity by following these steps:

* Avoid fixtures where reasonable. Sometimes it's not.
* If you are using fixtures, try to avoid fixture member variables. It is far
  too easy to start operating on those in ways akin to globals: data flow is
  hard to track since absolutely any code path in the fixture may modify the
  member.
* If you've got variables that need complex initialization that would make
  each test hard to read, consider a helper function (not part of the fixture)
  that documents that initialization and returns the object directly.
* If you must have fixtures that contain member variables, try to avoid
  methods that operate on those members directly: pass them in as parameters
  whenever possible to make the dataflow clear.
* Try to write tests before writing headers: if you start with a usage that is
  pleasant to test, your API is usually better, and your tests are almost
  always clearer.
