---
title: "Tip of the Week #64: Raw String Literals"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/64
type: markdown
order: "064"
---

Originally published as totw/64 on 2013-12-09

*By Titus Winters [(titus@google.com)](mailto:titus@google.com)*

Updated 2017-10-23

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/64](https://abseil.io/tips/64)

*`"(?:\"(?:\\\\\"|[^\"])*\"|'(?:\\\\'|[^'])*')";` &mdash; A cat walking over the
keyboard . . . or maybe what the fox says . . . no, actually just a highly-
escaped regexp found in real C++ code.*

Odds are you’ve had trouble getting your regular expression understood properly
in C++ due to escaping issues. Similarly, you’ve probably been annoyed with
preserving quotes and newlines when embedding a text version of Protobuf or JSON
data into your unittests. When you have to use significant escaping (or worse,
multi-layer escaping), code clarity drops precipitously.

Luckily, there’s a new C++11 feature that removes this need for escaping: raw
string literals.

## The Raw String Literal Format

A raw string literal has the following special syntax:

```c++
R"tag(whatever you want to say)tag"
```


`tag` is a sequence of up to 16 characters (and an empty tag is both OK and
common). The characters after '"tag(' and before the first following occurrence
of ')tag"' are used literally as the contents of the string literal. 'tag' may
contain any character but parentheses, backslash, and whitespace.

Examine the difference:

```c++
const char concert_17_raw[] =
    "id: 17\n"
    "artist: \"Beyonce\"\n"
    "date: \"Wed Oct 10 12:39:54 EDT 2012\"\n"
    "price_usd: 200\n";
```

versus:

```c++
const char concert_17_raw[] = R"(
    id: 17
    artist: "Beyonce"
    date: "Wed Oct 10 12:39:54 EDT 2012"
    price_usd: 200)";
```

## Special Cases

Note that indentation rules, combined with the fact that raw string literals may
contain newlines, leave you with an awkward choice on how to indent the first
line of your raw string block. Because text protobufs ignore whitespace, this
problem can be avoided by throwing in a leading newline (ignored by the parser)
in that case, but not all uses of raw strings are so forgiving.

A non-empty tag is useful when the sequence `)"` happens to appear in your
string and therefore can’t act as the closing delimiter:

```c++
std::string my_string = R"foo(This contains quoted parens "()")foo";
```

## Conclusion

Raw string literals are certainly not an everyday tool for most of us, but there
are times when good use of this new language feature will increase readability.
So the next time you’re scratching your head trying to figure out if you need
two <code>\\</code>s or four, try raw string literals instead. Your readers will
thank you for it, even if regular expressions are still hard:

```c++
R"regexp((?:"(?:\\"|[^"])*"|'(?:\\'|[^'])*'))regexp";
```
