---
title: "Tip of the Week #107: Reference Lifetime Extension"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/107
type: markdown
order: "107"
---

Originally posted as totw/107 on 2015-12-10

By Titus Winters (titus@google.com)

There have been some reports of confusion about references and lifetimes after
[TotW 101](/tips/101), so in this Tip we'll dive more into the question, "When does
reference lifetime extension apply?"

```c++
string Foo::GetName();

const string& name = obj.GetName();  // Is this safe/legal?
```

In short, lifetimes of temporaries (referents) will be extended *if and only if*

*   A local `const T&` (or `T&&`, although Google style generally ignores that)
    is initialized to the result of an expression (usually a function call)
    returning a temporary `T` *or* the `T` subobject of a temporary (e.g. a
    struct containing `T`).
    *   This doesn't work when assigning to `T&`, it must be `const T&`. (It's a
        compilation error.)
    *   This doesn't work if there is a (non-polymorphic) type conversion at
        play. For instance, assigning to `const absl::string_view&` from
        `string` does not extend the lifetime of the `string`. (You also don't
        want `const absl::string_view&` in the first place, but that's
        a separate issue).
    *   This doesn't work when you're getting the subobject indirectly: the
        compiler doesn't look through function calls (getters or the like). The
        subobject form only works when you're directly assigning from a public
        member variable subobject of the temporary. (So it doesn't come up often
        because we don't have many expressions that return temporary structs.)
    *   The case where type conversion is allowed is when assigning to a `T&`
        from a temporary of `U` when `T` is a parent class of `U`. Please don't
        do that: it's even more confusing for readers than the other cases.

If the lifetime of the temporary is extended, it will last until the reference
goes out of scope. If the lifetime of the temporary isn't extended in the above
fashion, the `T` being referred to is destroyed at the end of the statement
(when we get to the next `;`).

As per [TotW 101](/tips/101) you probably shouldn't rely on lifetime extension
in the explicit case of reference-initialization: it's not gaining you much/any
performance, and it is subtle, fragile, and prone to cause extra work for your
reviewers and future maintainers.

There are subtle cases where lifetime extension *is* happening and is necessary
and beneficial (like ranged-for over a temporary container), but again, the
extension is only for the result of the temporary expression, not any
sub-expressions. For instance, these work:

```c++
std::vector<int> GetInts();
for (int i : GetInts()) { }  // lifetime extension on the vector is important

// Return string_views of size 1 for each char in this string.
std::vector<absl::string_view> Explode(const string& s);

// Lifetime extension kicks in on the vector, but *not* on the temporary string!
for (absl::string_view s : Explode(StrCat("oo", "ps"))) { }  // WRONG
```

This does not work:

```c++
MyProto GetProto();

// Lifetime extension *doesn't work* here: sub_protos (a repeated field)
// is destroyed by MyProto going out of scope, and the lifetime extension rules
// don't kick in here to magically lifetime extend the MyProto returned by
// GetProto().  The sub-object lifetime extension only works for simple
// is-a-member-of relationships: the compiler doesn't see that sub_protos()
// itself returning a reference to an sub-object of the outer temporary.
for (const SubProto& p : GetProto().sub_protos()) { }  // WRONG
```
