---
title: "Tip of the Week #1: string_view"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/1
type: markdown
order: "001"
---

Originally posted as TotW #1 on April 20, 2012

*By [Michael Chastain](mailto:mec.desktop@gmail.com)*

Updated 2020-08-18

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/1](https://abseil.io/tips/1)


## What's a <code>string_view</code>, and Why Should You Care?

When creating a function to take a (constant) string as an argument, you have
three common alternatives: two that you already know, and one of which you might
not be aware:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// C Convention
void TakesCharStar(const char* s);

// Old Standard C++ convention
void TakesString(const std::string& s);

// string_view C++ conventions
void TakesStringView(absl::string_view s);    // Abseil
void TakesStringView(std::string_view s);     // C++17
</pre>

The first two cases work best when a caller has the string in the format already
provided, but what happens when a conversion is needed (either from `const
char*` to `std::string` or `std::string` to `const char*`)?

Callers needing to convert a `std::string` to a `const char*` need to use the
(efficient but inconvenient) `c_str()` function:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void AlreadyHasString(const std::string& s) {
  TakesCharStar(s.c_str());               // explicit conversion
}
</pre>

Callers needing to convert a `const char*` to a `std::string` don’t need to do
anything additional (the good news) but will invoke the creation of a
(convenient but inefficient) temporary string, copying the contents of that
string (the bad news):

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void AlreadyHasCharStar(const char* s) {
  TakesString(s); // compiler will make a copy
}
</pre>

## What to Do?

Google’s preferred option for accepting such string parameters is through a
`string_view`. This is a "pre-adopted" type from C++17 - for now, use
`absl::string_view` even if `std::string_view` is available; they are not
entirely interchangeable yet.

An instance of the `string_view` class can be thought of as a "view" into an
existing character buffer. Specifically, a `string_view` consists of only a
pointer and a length, identifying a section of character data that is not owned
by the `string_view` and cannot be modified by the view. Consequently, making a
copy of a `string_view` is a shallow operation: no string data is copied.

`string_view` has implicit conversion constructors from both `const char*` and
`const std::string&`, and since `string_view` doesn't copy, there is no O(n)
memory penalty for making a hidden copy. In the case where a `const
std::string&` is passed, the constructor runs in O(1) time. In the case where a
`const char*` is passed, the constructor invokes a `strlen()` automatically (or
you can use the two-parameter `string_view` constructor).

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void AlreadyHasString(const std::string& s) {
  TakesStringView(s); // no explicit conversion; convenient!
}

void AlreadyHasCharStar(const char* s) {
  TakesStringView(s); // no copy; efficient!
}
</pre>

Because the `string_view` does not own its data, any strings pointed to by the
`string_view` (just like a `const char*`) must have a known lifespan, and must
outlast the `string_view` itself. This means that using `string_view` for
storage is often questionable: you need some proof that the underlying data will
outlive the `string_view`.

If your API only needs to reference the string data during a single call, and
doesn't need to modify the data, accepting a `string_view` is sufficient. If you
need to reference the data later or need to modify the data, you can explicitly
convert to a C++ string object using `std::string(my_string_view)`.

Adding `string_view` into an existing codebase is not always the right answer:
changing parameters to pass by `string_view` can be inefficient if those are
then passed to a function requiring a `std::string` or a NUL-terminated `const
char*`. It is best to adopt `string_view` starting at the utility code and
working upward, or with complete consistency when starting a new project.

## A Few Additional Notes

*   Unlike other string types, you should pass `string_view` by value just like
    you would an int or a double because `string_view` is a small value.
*   Marking a `string_view` as `const` only affects whether the `string_view`
    object itself can be modified, and not whether it can be used to modify the
    underlying chars -- it never can. This is exactly analogous to how a `const
    char*` can never be used to modify the chars, even if the pointer itself can
    be modified.
*   For function parameters, don't qualify `string_view` with `const` in
    function declarations (see [Tip #109](/tips/109)). You may use `const` to
    qualify `string_view` in function definitions at your (or your team's)
    discretion, e.g., to be consistent with the surrounding code
    ([Tip #109](/tips/109)). For other local variables, using `const` is neither
    encouraged nor discouraged
    (https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Use_of_const).
*   `string_view` is not necessarily NUL-terminated. Thus, it's not safe to
    write:

    <pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
        printf("%s\n", sv.data()); // DON’T DO THIS
    </pre>

    Prefer this instead:

    <pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
        absl::PrintF("%s\n", sv);
    </pre>

*   You can log a `string_view` just like you would a string or a `const
    char*` :

    <pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
        std::cout &lt;&lt; "Took '" &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; "'";
    </pre>

*   You can convert an existing routine that accepts `const std::string&` or
    NUL-terminated `const char*` to `string_view` safely in most cases. The only
    danger we have encountered in performing this operation is if the address of
    the function has been taken, this will result in a build break as the
    resulting function-pointer type will be different.

*   `string_view` has a constexpr constructor and a trivial destructor; keep
    this in mind when using in static and global variables (see
    [the style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Static_and_Global_Variables))
    or constants (see [Tip #140](/tips/140)).
