---
title: "Tip of the Week #112: emplace vs. push_back"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/112
type: markdown
order: "112"
---

Originally posted as totw/112 on 2016-02-25

By Geoff Romer [(gromer@google.com)](mailto:gromer@google.com)

Revised 2017-08-30

*"The less we use our power, the greater it will be." — Thomas Jefferson*

As you may already know (and if not, [TotW 65](/tips/65)), C++11 introduced a
powerful new way to insert items into containers: `emplace` methods. These let
you construct an object in-place inside the container, using any of the object's
constructors. That includes the move and copy constructors, so it turns out any
time you could use a `push` or `insert` method, you can use an `emplace` method
instead, with no other changes:

```c++
std::vector<string> my_vec;
my_vec.push_back("foo");     // This is OK, so...
my_vec.emplace_back("foo");  // This is also OK, and has the same result

std::set<string> my_set;
my_set.insert("foo");        // Same here: any insert call can be
my_set.emplace("foo");       // rewritten as an emplace call.
```

This raises an obvious question: which one should you use? Should we perhaps
just discard `push_back()` and `insert()`, and use `emplace` methods all the
time?

Let me answer that question by asking another: what do these two lines of code
do?

```c++
vec1.push_back(1<<20);
vec2.emplace_back(1<<20);
```

The first line is quite straightforward: it adds the number 1048576 to the end
of the vector. The second, however, is not so clear. Without knowing the type of
the vector, we don't know what constructor it's invoking, so we can't really say
what that line is doing. For example, if `vec2` is a `std::vector<int>`, that
line merely adds 1048576 to the end, as with the first line, but if `vec2` is a
`std::vector<std::vector<int>>`, that second line constructs a `vector` of over
a million elements, allocating several megabytes of memory in the process.

Consequently, if you have a choice between `push_back()` and `emplace_back()`
with the same arguments, your code will tend to be more readable if you choose
`push_back()`, because `push_back()` expresses your intent more specifically.
Choosing `push_back()` is also safer: suppose you have a
`std::vector<std::vector<int>>` and you want to append a number to the end of
the first `vector`, but you accidentally forget the subscript. If you write
`my_vec.push_back(2<<20)`, you'll get a compile error and you'll quickly spot
the problem. On the other hand, if you write `my_vec.emplace_back(2<<20)`, the
code will compile, and you won't notice any problems until run-time.

Now, it's true that when implicit conversions are involved, `emplace_back()` can
be somewhat faster than `push_back()`. For example, in the code that we began
with, `my_vec.push_back("foo")` constructs a temporary `string` from the string
literal, and then moves that string into the container, whereas
`my_vec.emplace_back("foo")` just constructs the `string` directly in the
container, avoiding the extra move. For more expensive types, this may be a
reason to use `emplace_back()` instead of `push_back()`, despite the readability and
safety costs, but then again it may not. Very often the performance difference
just won't matter. As always, the rule of thumb is that you should avoid
"optimizations" that make the code less safe or less clear, unless the
performance benefit is big enough to show up in your application benchmarks.

So in general, if both `push_back()` and `emplace_back()` would work with the same
arguments, you should prefer `push_back()`, and likewise for `insert()` vs.
`emplace()`.

