---
title: "Tip of the Week #135: Test the Contract, not the Implementation"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: draft
permalink: tips/135
type: markdown
---

# Tip of the Week #135: Test the Contract, not the Implementation

Originally posted as totw/135 on ORIGINAL DATE

By James Dennett (jdennett@google.com)

"If you have one true friend you have more than your share." — Thomas Fuller

C++ has a somewhat elaborate access control mechanism using `public`,
`protected`, `private`, and `friend`. Test code has its own rules of etiquette
for using those facilities, and GoogleTest augments them with its own
`FRIEND_TEST` macro. Use of `FRIEND_TEST` should be a last resort, not a
preferred choice.

We write tests to find bugs in the implementation of a component's contract, or
to give us sufficient confidence that there are no such bugs. When using
test-driven development (TDD), we also write tests to help us to design that
contract. Tests that depend on unspecified aspects of a component are brittle,
and prone to reporting failures even when the production code is working
correctly.

Prefer to test via the public interface of a component. More generally, tests
should verify the contract of a component and, just as with any other client,
should not make assumptions beyond what's guaranteed.

Sometimes it's hard to get sufficient coverage when testing via a minimal
interface. If your component is implementing a very narrow interface specified
by a base class (e.g., one with only a `ProcessItem` virtual function) and it's
impractical to gain sufficient confidence from a test that uses only that
interface, consider creating a new, testable component containing the
implementation details. Then the class containing the virtual function can be so
simple that it needs only minimal testing. BUILD visibility can be used to
restrict use of your implementation class if needed (and if your build system
supports it).

If a test depends on just one or two private functions, consider making those
functions part of the public interface. This isn't so bad: you'll need them to
have a clearly documented interface anyway, and other clients (not just the
test) might find them useful. If, after consideration, you decide that a
function really is only for tests then it should be documented as such, and
maybe named with a `ForTesting` suffix.

If the test still needs to have access to private implementation details, create
a *test peer* (sometimes called a *test spouse*). A test peer is a friend class
of the class under test, often defined in the `_test.cc` file (though some
prefer to define it in the same file as the class that befriends it), and used
to provide controlled access to the class under test to the test code. The test
peer won't be able to live in an anonymous namespace as its exact name needs to
match the `friend` declaration, but the rest of the test code can be in an
anonymous namespace as usual. The name of a test peer class typically ends in
`Peer`.

The last option is the `FRIEND_TEST` macro. While common in older code, this
should not be used in new code. It introduces reverse coupling, making the
production header file depend on details of the associated unit test. It forces
the tests to move out of the anonymous namespace. Every `FRIEND_TEST` grants a
test function unrestricted access to the class under test; in long test
functions it can be hard to see where the test modifies the state of the class
under test. It requires use of an unusual header file provided by GoogleTest for
inclusion in production code, whereas almost all of GoogleTest is intended only
for use in tests. And finally it scales badly, requiring new `FRIEND_TEST` uses
to be added to the production header when new tests are added. In practice this
often results in header files having lengthy blocks of `FRIEND_TEST` lines.

## Summary of Recommendations

*   Prefer to test the client interface of a component, and keep tests
    independent of private implementation details.
*   Factor out a testable, possibly test-only subcomponent if the client
    interface isn't sufficient to thoroughly exercise the unit under test.
*   Sometimes it's reasonable to add to the public interface in order to make a
    component testable.
*   If necessary, access private members from tests using a *test peer* rather
    than using `FRIEND_TEST`.
