---
title: "Tip of the Week #131: Special Member Functions and `= default`"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/131
type: markdown
---

Originally posted as totw/131 on 2017-03-24

By James Dennett [(jdennett@google.com)](mailto:jdennett@google.com)

Since the beginning of time, C++ has supported compiler-declared versions of
some so-called *special member functions*: the default constructor, destructor,
copy constructor and copy assignment operators. C++11 added move construction
and move assignment to the list, and added syntax (`=default` and `=delete`) to
give control over when those defaults are declared and defined.

## What Does `=default` Do, and Why Would We Use It?

Writing `=default` is our way to tell the compiler "do what you would normally
have done for this special member function". Why might we want to do this
rather than writing an implementation by hand or leaving the compiler to
declare one for us?

*   We can change the access level (e.g., make a constructor `protected` instead
    of `public`), make a destructor virtual, or reinstate a function that would
    be suppressed (e.g., a default constructor for a class that has other
    user-declared constructors) and still get the compiler to generate the
    function for us;
*   Compiler-defined copy and move operations don't need maintenance every time
    members are added or removed, if copying/moving the members is sufficient;
*   Compiler-provided special member functions can be *trivial* (when all of the
    operations they invoke are themselves trivial), which can make them faster
    and safer;
*   Types with defaulted constructors can be *aggregates*, and hence support
    *aggregate initialization*, whereas those with user-provided constructors
    cannot.
*   Explicitly declaring a defaulted member gives us a place to document the
    semantics of the resulting function;
*   In a class template, `=default` gives a simple way to conditionally provide
    an operation depending on whether some underlying type provides it.

When we use `=default` on the initial declaration of a special member function,
the compiler will check whether it can synthesize an inline definition for that
function. If it can, it does. If it can't, the function is actually declared as
*deleted*, just as if we'd written `=delete`. That's just what we'd need for
transparently wrapping a class (say, if we're defining a class template), but it
can be surprising to readers.

If a function's initial declaration uses `=default`, or if the compiler declares
a special member function that is not user-declared, an appropriate `noexcept`
specification is deduced, potentially allowing faster code.

## How Does It Work?

Before C++11, if we needed a default constructor and already had other
constructors, we'd have written one as:

```c++
class A {
 public:
  A() {}  // User-provided, non-trivial constructor makes A a non-aggregate.
};
```

From C++11 onwards we have more options.

```c++
class C {
 public:
  C() = default;  // misleading: C has a deleted default constructor
 private:
  const int i;  // const => must always be initialized.
};

class D {
 public:
  D() = default;  // unsurprising, but not explicit: D has a default constructor
 private:
  std::unique_ptr<int> p;  // std::unique_ptr has a default constructor
};
```

Clearly we shouldn't write code like `class C`: in a non-template, use
`=default` only if you intend the class to support the operation (and then test
that it does).  clang-tidy includes a check for this.

When `=default` is used *after* the first declaration of a special member
function (i.e., outside of the class), it has a simpler meaning: it tells the
compiler to define the function, and to give an error if it is unable to do so.
When `=default` is used outside of the class, the defaulted function will not be
trivial: triviality is determined by the first declaration (so that all clients
agree on whether the operation is trivial or not).

If you don't need your class to be an aggregate and you don't need the
constructor to be trivial then defaulting the constructor outside of the class
definition like examples `E` and `F` below is often a good choice.  Its meaning
is clear to readers, and is checked by the compiler.  For the special case of
defaulting a *default* constructor or a destructor we could write `{}` instead
of `=default`, but for other defaulted operations the compiler-generated
implementation is less simple, and for consistency it's good to write `=default`
in all applicable cases.

```c++
class E {
 public:
  E();  // promises to have a default constructor, but...
 private:
  const int i;  // const => must always be initialized.
};
inline E::E() = default;  // compilation error here: would not initialize `i`

class F {
 public:
  F();  // promises to have a default constructor
 private:
  std::unique_ptr<int> p;  // std::unique_ptr has a default constructor
};
inline F::F() = default;  // works as expected
```

## Recommendations

Prefer `=default` over writing an equivalent implementation by hand, even
if that implementation is just `{}`. Optionally, omit `=default` from the
initial declaration and provide a separate defaulted implementation.

Be cautious about defaulting move operations. Moved-from objects must still
satisfy the invariants of their type, and the default implementations will
usually not preserve relationships between fields.

Outside of templates, write `=delete` instead if `=default` wouldn't provide an
implementation.
