---
title: "Tip of the Week #109: Meaningful `const` in Function Declarations"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/109
type: markdown
order: "109"
---

Originally posted as totw/109 on 2016-01-14

By Greg Miller [(jgm@google.com)](mailto:jgm@google.com)

This document will explain when `const` is meaningful in function declarations,
and when it is meaningless and best omitted. But first, let us briefly explain
what is meant by the terms *declaration* and *definition*.

Consider the following code:

```c++
void F(int);                     // 1: declaration of F(int)
void F(const int);               // 2: re-declaration of F(int)
void F(int) { /* ... */ }        // 3: definition of F(int)
void F(const int) { /* ... */ }  // 4: error: re-definition of F(int)
```

The first two lines are function *declarations*. A function *declaration* tells
the compiler the function's signature and return type. In the above example, the
function's signature is `F(int)`. The constness of the function's parameter type
is ignored, so both declarations are equivalent (See ("Overloadable
declarations")[http://eel.is/c++draft/over.load]).

Lines 3 and 4 from the above code are both function *definitions*. A function
*definition* is also a declaration, but a definition also contains the
function's body. Therefore, line 3 is a definition for a function with the
signature `F(int)`. Similarly, line 4 is also a definition for the same
function, `F(int)`, which will result in an error at link time. Multiple
declarations are allowed, but only a single definition is permitted.

Even though the definitions on lines 3 and 4 *declare* and *define* the same
function, there is a difference within their function bodies due to the way they
are declared. From the definition on line 3, the type of the function-parameter
variable within the function will be `int` (i.e., non-const). On the other hand,
the definition on line 4 will produce a function-parameter variable within the
function whose type is `const int`.

## Meaningful `const` in Function Declarations

Not all `const` qualifications in function declarations are ignored. To quote
from "Overloadable declarations" ([over.load]) in the C++ standard (emphasis
added):

> `const` type-specifiers **buried within a parameter type specification** are
> significant and can be used to distinguish overloaded function declarations

The following are examples where `const` is significant and not ignored:

```c++
void F(const int* x);                  // 1
void F(const int& x);                  // 2
void F(std::unique_ptr<const int> x);  // 3
void F(int* x);                        // 4
```

In the above examples, the `x` parameter itself is never declared `const`. Each
of the above functions accepts a parameter named `x` of a different type, thus
forming a valid overload set. Line 1 declares a function that accepts a "pointer
to an `int` that is `const`". Line 2 declares a function that accepts a
"reference to an `int` that is `const`". And line 3 declares a function that
accepts a "unique_ptr to an `int` that is `const`". All of these uses of `const`
are important and not ignored because they are part of the parameter type
specification and are not top-level `const` qualifications that affect the
parameter `x` itself.

Line 4 is interesting because it does not include the `const` keyword at all,
and may at first appear to be equivalent to the declaration on line 1 given the
reasons cited at the beginning of this document. The reason that this is not
true and that line 4 is a valid and distinct declaration is that only top-level,
or outermost, `const` qualifications of the parameter type specification are
ignored.

To complete this example, let us look at a few more examples where a `const` is
meaningless and ignored.

```c++
void F(const int x);          // 1: declares F(int)
void F(int* const x);         // 2: declares F(int*)
void F(const int* const x);   // 3: declares F(const int*)
```

## Rules of Thumb

Though few of us will ever truly master all the delightful obscurities of C++,
it is important that we do our best to understand the rules of the game. This
will help us write code that is understood by other C++ programmers who are
following the same rules and playing the same game. For this reason, it is
important that we understand when `const` qualification is meaningful in a
function declaration and when it is ignored.

Although there is no official guidance from the [Google C++ style guide]
(http://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html), and there is no single
generally accepted opinion, the following is one reasonable set of guidelines:

1.  Never use top-level `const` on function parameters in *declarations* that
    are not definitions (and be careful not to copy/paste a meaningless
    `const`). It is meaningless and ignored by the compiler, it is visual noise,
    and it could mislead readers.
2.  Do use top-level `const` on function parameters in *definitions* at your (or
    your team's) discretion. You might follow the same rationale as you would
    for when to declare a function-local variable `const`.
