---
title: "Tip of the Week #74: Delegating and Inheriting Constructors"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/74
type: markdown
order: "074"
---

Originally posted as totw/74 on 2014-04-21

By Bradley White [(bww@google.com)](mailto:bww@google.com)

*"Delegating work works, provided the one delegating works, too." -- Robert
Half*

When a class has multiple constructors there is often a need to perform similar
initialization in each variant. To avoid code duplication, many older
classes resort to defining a private `SharedInit()` method that is called from
the constructors. For example:

```c++
class C {
 public:
  C(int x, string s) { SharedInit(x, s); }
  explicit C(int x) { SharedInit(x, ""); }
  explicit C(string s) { SharedInit(0, s); }
  C() { SharedInit(0, ""); }
 private:
  void SharedInit(int x, string s) { … }
};
```

C++11 provides a new mechanism, delegating constructors, for dealing with such
situations more clearly by allowing one constructor to be defined in terms of
another. It is also an efficiency gain if the class has members that are
expensive to default-initialize.

```c++
class C {
 public:
  C(int x, string s) { … }
  explicit C(int x) : C(x, "") {}
  explicit C(string s) : C(0, s) {}
  C() : C(0, "") {}
};
```

Note that if you delegate to another constructor you cannot also use a member
initialization list -- all initialization is done by the delegated constructor.
Don’t go overboard though. If all the shared code does is set members, separate
member-initialization lists or in-class initializers are probably clearer than
using delegating constructors. Use good judgement.

<p class="note">
Aside: an object is not considered complete until the delegating constructor
returns; in practice, this only matters if the constructors can throw, as they
leave the delegated-from objects in an incomplete state.
</p>

Another, less common form of constructor code duplication occurs when extending
the behavior of a multi-constructor class through a wrapper. For example,
consider a "veneer" subclass of C that just adds a new member function.

```c++
class D : public C {
 public:
  void NewMethod();
};
```

But what of the constructors for D? We’d like to simply re-use those from C
rather than writing out all the forwarding boilerplate, and C++11 allows for
this via the new *inheriting constructors* mechanism.

```c++
class D : public C {
 public:
  using C::C;  // inherit all constructors from C
  void NewMethod();
};
```

This new form of "using" for constructors matches its previous use for
member functions.

Note, however, that constructors should really only be inherited when the
derived class does not add new data members that need to be initialized
explicitly. Indeed, the style guide cautions against inheriting constructors
unless the new members (if any) have in-class initialization.

So, go ahead and use C++11’s delegating and inheriting constructors when they
reduce duplication, eliminate forwarding boilerplate, or otherwise make your
classes simpler and clearer.
