---
title: "Tip of the Week #77: Temporaries, Moves, and Copies"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/77
type: markdown
order: "077"
---

Originally published as totw/77 on 2014-07-09

*By Titus Winters [(titus@google.com)](mailto:titus@google.com)*

Updated 2017-10-20

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/77](https://abseil.io/tips/77)

In the ongoing attempt to figure out how to explain to non-language-lawyers how
C++11 changed things, we present yet another entry in the series "When are
copies made?" This is part of a general attempt to simplify the subtle rules
that have surrounded copies in C++ and replace it with a simpler set of rules.

## Can You Count to 2?

You can? Awesome. Remember that the "name rule" means that each unique name you
can assign to a certain resource affects how many copies of the object are in
circulation. (See [TotW 55](/tips/55) on Name Counting for a refresher.)

## Name Counting, in Brief

If you’re worrying about a copy being created, presumably you’re worried about
some line of code in particular. So, look at that point. How many names exist
for the data you think is being copied? There are only 3 cases to consider:

## Two Names: It’s a Copy

This one is easy: if you’re giving a second name to the same data, it’s a copy.

```c++
std::vector<int> foo;
FillAVectorOfIntsByOutputParameterSoNobodyThinksAboutCopies(&foo);
std::vector<int> bar = foo;     // Yep, this is a copy.

std::map<int, string> my_map;
string forty_two = "42";
my_map[5] = forty_two;          // Also a copy: my_map[5] counts as a name.
```

## One Name: It’s a Move

This one is a little surprising: C++11 recognizes that if you can’t refer to a
name anymore, you also don’t care about that data anymore. The language had to
be careful not to break cases where you were relying on the destructor (say,
`absl::MutexLock`), so `return` is the easy case to identify.

```c++
std::vector<int> GetSomeInts() {
  std::vector<int> ret = {1, 2, 3, 4};
  return ret;
}

// Just a move: either "ret" or "foo" has the data, but never both at once.
std::vector<int> foo = GetSomeInts();
```

The other way to tell the compiler that you’re done with a name (the "name
eraser" from [TotW 55](/tips/55)) is calling `std::move()`.

```c++
std::vector<int> foo = GetSomeInts();
// Not a copy, move allows the compiler to treat foo as a
// temporary, so this is invoking the move constructor for
// std::vector<int>.
// Note that it isn’t the call to std::move that does the moving,
// it’s the constructor. The call to std::move just allows foo to
// be treated as a temporary (rather than as an object with a name).
std::vector<int> bar = std::move(foo);
```

## Zero Names: It’s a Temporary

Temporaries are also special: if you want to avoid copies, avoid providing names
to variables.

```c++
void OperatesOnVector(const std::vector<int>& v);

// No copies: the values in the vector returned by GetSomeInts()
// will be moved (O(1)) into the temporary constructed between these
// calls and passed by reference into OperatesOnVector().
OperatesOnVector(GetSomeInts());
```

## Beware: Zombies

The above (other than `std::move()` itself) is hopefully pretty intuitive, it’s
just that we all built up weird notions of copies in the years pre-dating C++11.
For a language without garbage collection, this type of accounting gives us an
excellent mix of performance and clarity. However, it’s not without dangers, and
the big one is this: what is left in a value after it has been moved from?

```c++
T bar = std::move(foo);
CHECK(foo.empty()); // Is this valid? Maybe, but don’t count on it.
```

This is one of the major difficulties: what can we say about these leftover
values? For most standard library types, such a value is left in a "valid but
unspecified state." Non-standard types usually hold to the same rule. The safe
approach is to stay away from these objects: you are allowed to re-assign to
them, or let them go out of scope, but don’t make any other assumptions about
their state.

Clang-tidy provides some some static-checking to catch use-after move with the
[bugprone-use-after-move](https://clang.llvm.org/extra/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone/use-after-move.html)
check. However, static-analysis won't ever be able to catch all of these - be on
the lookout. Call these out in code review, and avoid them in your own code.
Stay away from the zombies.

## Wait, `std::move` Doesn’t Move?

Yeah, one other thing to watch for is that a call to `std::move()` isn’t 
actually a move itself, it’s just a cast to an rvalue-reference. It’s only the 
use of that reference by a move constructor or move assignment that does the 
work.

```c++
std::vector<int> foo = GetSomeInts();
std::move(foo); // Does nothing.
// Invokes std::vector<int>’s move-constructor.
std::vector<int> bar = std::move(foo);
```

This should almost never happen, and you probably shouldn’t waste a lot of
mental storage on it. I really only mention it if the connection between
`std::move()` and a move constructor was confusing you.

## Aaaagh! It’s All Complicated! Why!?!

First: it’s really not so bad. Since we have move operations in the majority of
our value types (including protobufs), we can do away with all of the
discussions of "Is this a copy? Is this efficient?" and just rely on name
counting: two names, a copy. Fewer than that: no copy.

Ignoring the issue of copies, value semantics are clearer and simpler to reason
about. Consider these two operations:

```c++
void Foo(std::vector<string>* paths) {
  ExpandGlob(GenerateGlob(), paths);
}

std::vector<string> Bar() {
  std::vector<string> paths;
  ExpandGlob(GenerateGlob(), &paths);
  return paths;
}
```

Are these the same? What about if there is existing data in `*paths`? How can
you tell? Value semantics are easier for a reader to reason about than
input/output parameters, where you need to think about (and document) what
happens to existing data, and potentially whether there is an pointer ownership
transfer.

Because of the simpler guarantees about lifetime and usage when dealing with
values (instead of pointers), it is easier for the compiler’s optimizers to
operate on code in that style. Well-managed value semantics also minimizes hits
on the allocator (which is cheap but not free). Once we understand how move
semantics help rid us of copies, the compiler’s optimizers can better reason
about object types, lifetimes, virtual dispatch, and a host of other issues that
help generate more efficient machine code.

Since most utility code is now move-aware, we should stop worrying about copies
and pointer semantics, and focus on writing simple easy-to-follow code. Please
make sure you understand the new rules: not all legacy interfaces you encounter
may be updated to return by value (instead of by output parameter), so there will
always be a mix of styles. It’s important that you understand when one is more
appropriate than the other.

