---
title: "Tip of the Week #49: Argument-Dependent Lookup"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/49
type: markdown
order: "049"
---

Originally posted as totw/49 on 2013-07-14

*"...whatever disappearing trail of its legalistic argle-bargle one chooses to
follow..." --Antonin Scalia, [U.S. v Windsor dissenting opinion]
(http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/12-307_6j37.pdf)**

## Overview

A function call expression such as `func(a,b,c)`, in which the function is named
without the `::` scope operator, is called unqualified. When C++ code refers to
a function by an unqualified name, the compiler performs a search for a matching
function declaration. What is surprising to some people (and different from
other languages) is that in addition to the caller's lexical scope, the set of
search scopes is augmented by namespaces associated with the function argument
types. This additional lookup is called *Argument-Dependent Lookup* (ADL). It's
definitely happening in your code, so you'll be much better off with a basic
understanding of how it works.

## Name Lookup Basics

A function call must be mapped to a single function definition by the compiler.
This matching is done in two independent serial processing stages. First, *name
lookup* applies some scope searching rules to produce a set of overloads
matching the name of the function. Then *overload resolution* takes those
overloads produced by that name lookup and tries to choose a best match for the
arguments given at the call site. Keep this distinction in mind. Name lookup
comes first, and it doesn't try to make any determination as to whether a
function is a good match or not. It doesn't even consider the argument count. It
just searches scopes for a function name. Overload resolution is a complex topic
in its own right, but it's not our focus right now. Just know that it's a
separate processing stage that gets its inputs from name lookup.

When an unqualified function call is encountered, several independent search
sequences can occur for that function name, each attempting to match the name to
a set of overloads. The most obvious search is the outward search starting from
the lexical scope of the call site:

```c++
namespace b {
void func();
namespace internal {
void test() { func(); } // ok: finds b::func().
} // b::internal
} // b
```

This name lookup has nothing to do with ADL yet (`func()` has no arguments). It
is simply a search outward from the site of the function call, proceeding
outward from local function scope (if applicable), to class scope, enclosing
class scope, and base classes (if applicable), then to namespace scope, and out
into enclosing namespaces, and finally the global `::` namespace.

As name lookup progresses through a sequence of increasingly widening scopes,
the process stops as soon as any function with the target name is found, whether
or not that function's arguments are compatible with the arguments supplied by
the call site. When a scope is encountered containing at least one function
declaration with the target name, the overloads in that scope become the result
of that name lookup.

This is illustrated in the example below:

```c++
namespace b {
void func(const string&);  // b::func
namespace internal {
void func(int);  // b::internal::func
namespace deep {
void test() {
  string s("hello");
  func(s);  // error: finds only b::internal::func(int).
}
}  // b::internal::deep
}  // b::internal
}  // b
```

It's tempting but incorrect to think a `func(s)` expression will overlook the
obviously bad match of `b::internal::func(int)`, and continue looking to the
next outward enclosing scope to find `b::func(const string&)`. However, name
lookup doesn't consider argument types. It finds something called `func` and
stops in `b::internal`, leaving the evaluation of "obviously bad" to the
overload resolution phase. The `b::func(const string&)` function is never even
seen by overload resolution.

An important implication of the scoped search order is that overloads in a scope
appearing earlier in the search order will hide overloads from later scopes.

## Argument-Dependent Lookup

If a function call passes arguments, a few more parallel name lookups are
launched. These extra lookups begin in each associated namespace of each of the
function call’s arguments. A scope containing a name match doesn't stop all of
the lookups, only the one that encountered the match.

## The Simple Case

Consider the following code:

```c++
namespace aspace {
struct A {};
void func(const A&);  // found by ADL name lookup on 'a'.
}  // namespace aspace

namespace bspace {
void func(int);  // found by lexical scope name lookup
void test() {
  aspace::A a;
  func(a);  // aspace::func(const aspace::A&)
}
}  // namespace bspace
```

Two name lookups are launched to resolve the call to `func(a)`. The lexical
scope name lookup starts in the local function scope of `bspace::test()`. It
finds no `func` there and proceeds to the scope of namespace `bspace`, in which
it finds `func(int)` and stops. The other name lookup, which is due to ADL,
starts in the namespace associated with the argument `a`. In this case, that's
only namespace `aspace`. That lookup finds `aspace::func(const aspace::A&)` and
stops. Overload resolution therefore receives two candidates. These are
'bspace::func(int)' from lexical name lookup, and 'aspace::func(const
aspace::A&)' from the single ADL lookup. In overload resolution, the `func(a)`
call resolves to `aspace::func(const aspace::A&)`. The `bspace::func(int)`
overload is not a good match for the argument type and so it is rejected by
overload resolution.

The lexical name search and each of the additional ADL-triggered name searches
can be considered to occur in parallel, with each returning a set of candidate
function overloads. The results of all such searches are thrown in a bag and
they compete via overload resolution to determine the best match. If there's a
tie for best match, the compiler issues an ambiguity error; "There can be only
one." If no overload is a good match, that's an error too. So more precisely,
"there must be exactly one", which doesn't sound as cool in a movie trailer.

## Type-Associated Namespaces

The previous example was the simple case, but a more sophisticated type can have
many namespaces associated with it. The set of namespaces associated with a type
includes any namespace of any type that appears as a part of the argument type's
full name, including its template parameter types. It also includes the
namespaces of direct and indirect base classes. For example, a single argument
that expands to the type `a::A<b::B, c::internal::C*>` will produce searches
beginning in the `a`, `b` and `c::internal` namespaces (and any other namespaces
associated with the constituent types `a::A`, `b::B`, or `c::internal::C`), each
looking for the called function name. The following example shows a few of these
effects:

```c++
namespace aspace {
struct A {};
template <typename T> struct AGeneric {};
void func(const A&);
template <typename T> void find_me(const T&);
}  // namespace aspace

namespace bspace {
typedef aspace::A AliasForA;
struct B : aspace::A {};
template <typename T> struct BGeneric {};
void test() {
  // ok: base class namespace searched.
  func(B());
  // ok: template parameter namespace searched.
  find_me(BGeneric<aspace::A>());
  // ok: template namespace searched.
  find_me(aspace::AGeneric<int>());
}
}  // namespace bspace
```

## Tips

With the fundamental name lookup mechanism fresh in your mind, consider the
following tips which may help you when you are working with real C++ code.

## Type Aliases

Sometimes determining the set of namespaces associated with a type will take a
bit of detective work. `typedef` and using declarations can introduce aliases
for a type. In those cases the aliases are fully resolved and expanded to their
source types before the list of namespaces to search are chosen. This is one way
in which `typedef` and using declarations can be a bit misleading, because they
can lead you to make incorrect predictions about which namespaces will be
searched by ADL. This is demonstrated below:

```c++
namespace cspace {
// ok: note that this searches aspace, not bspace.
void test() {
  func(bspace::AliasForA());
}
}  // namespace cspace
```

## Caveat Iterator

Be careful with iterators. You don't really know with what namespaces they are
associated, so don't rely on ADL for resolving function calls involving
iterators. They might just be pointers to the elements, or they might be in some
namespace private to the implementation that has nothing to do with the
container's namespace.

```c++
namespace d {
int test() {
  std::vector<int> vec(a);
  // maybe this compiles, maybe not!
  return count(vec.begin(), vec.end(), 0);
}
}  // namespace d
```

The above code has a dependency on whether `std::vector<int>::iterator` is
`int*` (which is possible) or some type in a namespace that has a count overload
(like `std::count()`). It's possible that this will work on some platforms and not
others, or that it will work in debug builds with instrumented iterators, but
not in optimized builds. It's better to just qualify the function name. If you
want to call `std::count()`, spell it that way.

## Overloaded Operators

An operator (e.g. `+` or `<<`) can be thought of as a kind of function name,
e.g. `operator+(a,b)` or `operator<<(a,b)`, and are also unqualified. One of the
most important uses of ADL is the search for `operator<<` used during logging.
Usually we see something like `std::cout << obj;` for some `obj`, let's say of
type `O::Obj`. This statement is like an unqualified function call of the form
`operator<<(std::ostream&, const O::Obj&)`, which will find overloads in the
`std` namespace from the `std::ostream` parameter, the `O` namespace from the
`O::Obj` parameter, and of course any overloads picked up from the lexical scope
search from the call site.

It's important to place such operators in the same namespace as the user-defined
type they're meant to operate upon: in this case within namespace `O`. If the
`operator<<` is placed in an outer namespace like `::` (the global namespace),
that operator will work for a while until someone quite innocently places an
unrelated `operator<<` in namespace 'O' for some other type. It takes a bit of
discipline but saves a lot of confusion later to follow the simple rule of
defining all operators and other associated nonmember functions next to the
type's definition in the same namespace.

## Fundamental Types

Note that the fundamental types (e.g. `int`, `double`, etc) are not associated
with the global namespace. They are associated with no namespace. They do not
contribute any namespaces to ADL. Pointer and array types are associated with
their pointee or element types.

## Refactoring Gotchas

Refactorings that change the types of arguments to an unqualified function call
can affect which, if any, overloads are considered. Just moving a type into a
namespace and leaving behind a typedef in the old namespace for compatibility
doesn't help, and really just makes the problem harder to diagnose. Be careful
when moving types to new namespaces.

Similarly, moving a function to a new namespace and leaving behind a `using`
declaration might mean that unqualified calls won't find it anymore. Sadly, they
might still compile by finding a different function you didn't intend them to
find. Be careful when moving functions to new namespaces.

## Final Thought

Relatively few programmers understand the exact rules and corner cases involved
with function lookups. The language spec contains 13 pages of rules about what
exactly goes into a name search, including special cases, details about friend
functions, and enclosing class scopes to keep your head spinning for years.
Despite all this complexity, if you keep the basic idea of parallel name
searches in mind, you'll be on solid footing for understanding how your function
calls and operators are resolving. You will now be able to see how seemingly
remote declarations end up being chosen when you invoke functions or operators.
And you'll be a little better able to diagnose puzzling build errors like
ambiguities or name-hiding effects when they happen.



