---
title: "Tip of the Week #119: Using-declarations and namespace aliases"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/119
type: markdown
order: "119"
---

Originally posted as totw/119 on ORIGINAL DATE

By Thomas K&ouml;ppe (tkoeppe@google.com)

This tip gives a simple, robust recipe for writing *using-declarations* and
namespace aliases in `.cc` files that avoids subtle pitfalls.

Before we dive into the details, here is an example of the recipe in action:

```c++
namespace example {
namespace makers {
namespace {

using ::otherlib::BazBuilder;
using ::mylib::BarFactory;
namespace abc = ::applied::bitfiddling::concepts;

// Private helper code here.

}  // namespace

// Interface implementation code here.

}  // namespace makers
}  // namespace example
```

Remember that everything in this tip applies only to `.cc` files, since we
[never put convenience aliases in header
files](http://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Aliases). Such
aliases are a convenience for the implementer (and the reader of an
implementation), not an exported facility. (Names that *are* part of the
exported API may of course be declared in headers.)

## Summary

*   Never declare namespace aliases or convenience <em>using-declaration</em>s
    at namespace scope in header files, only in `.cc` files.

*   Declare namespace aliases and <em>using-declaration</em>s inside the
    innermost namespace, whether named or anonymous. (Do not add an anonymous
    namespace just for this purpose.)

*   When declaring namespace aliases and <em>using-declaration</em>s, use fully
    qualified names (with leading `::`) unless you are referring to a name
    inside the current namespace.

*   For other uses of names, avoid fully qualifying when reasonable; see
    [TotW 130](/tips/130).

(Remember that you can always have a local namespace alias or
*using-declaration* in a block scope, which can be handy in header-only
libraries.)

## Background

C++ organizes names into *namespaces*. This crucial facility allows code bases
to scale by keeping ownership of names local and not requiring non-local
agreement on name use. However, namespaces impose a certain cosmetic burden,
since qualified names (`foo::Bar`) are often long and quickly become clutter. We
often find it convenient to use *unqualified names* (`Bar`). Additionally, we
may wish to introduce a namespace alias for a long but frequently used
namespace: `namespace eu = example::v1::util;` We will collectively call
<em>using-declaration</em>s and namespace aliases just *aliases* in this tip.

## The problem

The purpose of a namespace is to help code authors avoid name collisions, both
at the point of name lookup and at the point of linking. Aliases can potentially
undermine the protection afforded by namespaces. The problem has two separate
aspects: the scope of the alias, and the use of relative qualifiers.

### Scope of the alias

The scope at which you place an alias can have subtle effects on code
maintainability. Consider the following two variants:

```c++
using ::foo::Quz;

namespace example {
namespace util {

using ::foo::Bar;
```

It appears that both <em>using-declaration</em>s are effective at making the
names `Bar` and `Quz` available for unqualified lookup inside our working
namespace `::example::util`. For `Bar`, everything is working as expected,
provided there is no other declaration of `Bar` inside namespace
`::example::util`. But this is your namespace, so it is in your power to control
this.

On the other hand, if a header is later included that declares a global name
`Quz`, then the first *using-declaration* becomes ill-formed, as it attempts to
redeclare the name `Quz`. And if another header declares `::example::Quz` or
`::example::util::Quz`, then unqualified lookup will find _that_ name rather
than your alias.

This brittleness can be avoided if you do not add names to namespaces that you
do not own (which includes the global namespace). By placing the aliases inside
your own namespace, the unqualified lookup finds your alias first and never
continues to search containing namespaces.

More generally, the closer a declaration is to the point of use, the smaller is
the set of scopes that can break your code. At the worst end of our example is
`Quz`, which can be broken by anyone; `Bar` can only be broken by other code in
`::example::util`, and a name that is declared and used inside an unnamed
namespace cannot be broken by any other scope ([see below](#unnamed-namespaces)
for an example).

### Relative qualifiers

A *using-declaration* of the form `using foo::Bar` seems innocuous, but it is in
fact ambiguous. The problem is that it is safe to rely on the *existence* of
names in a namespace, but it is not safe to rely on the *absence* of names.
Consider this code:

```c++
namespace example {
namespace util {

using foo::Bar;
```

It is perhaps the author&rsquo;s intention to use the name `::foo::Bar`.
However, this can break, because the code is relying on the existence of
`::foo::Bar` _and also_ on the non-existence of namespaces `::example::foo` and
`::example::util::foo`. This brittleness can be avoided by qualifying the used
name fully: `using ::foo::Bar`.

The only time that a relative name is unambiguous and cannot possibly be broken
by outside declarations is if it refers to a name that is already inside your
current namespace:

```c++
namespace example {
namespace util {
namespace internal {

struct Params { /* ... */ };

}  // namespace internal

using internal::Params;  // OK, same as ::example::util::internal::Params
```

This follows the same logic that we discussed in the previous section.

What if a name lives in a sibling namespace, such as `::example::tools::Thing`?
You can say either `tools::Thing` or `::example::tools::Thing`. The fully
qualified name is always correct, but it may also be appropriate to use the
relative name. Use your own judgment.

A cheap way to avoid a lot of these problems is not to use namespaces in your
project that are the same as popular top-level namespaces (such as `util`); the
Style Guide [recommends this practice]
(http://engdoc/eng/doc/devguide/cpp/styleguide.shtml#Namespace_Names)
explicitly.

### Demo

The following code shows examples of both failure modes.

**helper.h:**

```c++
namespace bar {
namespace foo {

// ...

}  // namespace foo
}  // namespace bar
```

**some_feature.h:**

```c++
extern int f;
```

**Your code:**

```c++
#include "helper.h"
#include "some_feature.h"

namespace foo {
void f();
}  // namespace foo

// Failure mode #1: Alias at a bad scope.
// using foo::f;  // Error: redeclaration (because of "f" declared in some_feature.h)

namespace bar {

// Failure mode #2: Alias badly qualified.
// using foo::f;  // Error: No "f" in namespace ::bar::foo (because that namespace was declared in helper.h)

// The recommended way, robust in the face of unrelated declarations:
using ::foo::f;  // OK

void UseCase() { f(); }

}  // namespace bar
```

## Unnamed namespaces

A *using-declaration* placed in an unnamed namespace can be accessed from the
enclosing namespace and vice versa. If you already have an unnamed namespace at
the top of the file, prefer putting all aliases there. From within that unnamed
namespace, you gain an extra little bit of robustness against clashing with
something declared in the enclosing namespace.

```c++
namespace example {
namespace util {

namespace {

// Put all using-declarations in here. Don't spread them over the file.
using ::foo::Bar;
using ::foo::Quz;

// In here, Bar and Quz refer inalienably to your aliases.

}  // namespace

// Can use both Bar and Quz here too. (But don't declare any entities called Bar or Quz yourself now.)
```

## Non-aliased names

So far we have been talking about local aliases for distant names. But what if
we want to use names directly and not create aliases at all? Should we say
`util::Status` or `::util::Status`?

There is no obvious answer. Unlike the alias declarations that we have been
discussing until now, which appear at the top of the file far away from the
actual code, the direct use of names affects the local readability of your code.
While it is true that relatively qualified names may break in the future, there
is a significant cost for using absolute qualifications. The visual clutter
caused by the leading `::` may well be distracting and not worth the added
robustness. In this case, use your own judgment to decide which style you
prefer. See [TotW 130](/tips/130).

## Acknowledgments

All credit is due to Roman Perepelitsa (romanp@google.com) who originally
suggested this style in a mailing list discussion and who contributed numerous
corrections and punchlines. However, all errors are mine.
