---
title: "Tip of the Week #94: Callsite Readability and bool Parameters"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/94
type: markdown
order: 094
---

Originally posted as totw/94 on 2015-04-27

*By Geoff Romer [(gromer@google.com)](mailto:gromer@google.com)*

Revised 2017-10-25

*"Of the many forms of false culture, a premature converse with abstractions is
perhaps the most likely to prove fatal to the growth of &hellip; vigour of
intellect." &mdash; George Boole.*

Pop quiz: what does this code do?

```c++ {.bad}
int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
  ParseCommandLineFlags(&argc, &argv, false);
}
```

In particular, can you explain what the last argument means without looking at
the documentation? I'll give you a hint: it has to do with whether google3
command-line flags are left in `argv` after the call, but which is `true` and
which is `false`?

OK, time's up. Pencils down. The answer is that this call will leave `argv`
untouched. As it happens, `ParseCommandLineFlags` removes command-line flags
from `argv` if the third argument is true.

If you didn't know that, good. You have better things to do with your brain than
memorize the parameter lists of semi-obscure google3 functions. But here's the
point: as programmers we face "pop quizzes" like this whenever we read code, and
it's just not practical to stop and look up the documentation for every function
call, even if it's just a click away in codesearch. We have to be able to make
pretty good guesses about what function calls mean, just from looking at the
callsite.

Well-chosen function names are the key to making function calls readable, but
they're often not enough. We usually need the arguments themselves to give us
some clues about what they mean. For example, you might not know what to make of
`absl::string_view s(x, y);` if you'd never seen `string_view` before, but
`absl::string_view s(my_str.data(), my_str.size());` and `absl::string_view
s("foo");` are much clearer. The trouble with `bool` parameters is that the
argument at the callsite is very often a literal `true` or `false`, and that
gives the reader no contextual cues about the meaning of the parameter, as we
saw in the `ParseCommandLineFlags` example. This problem is compounded if
there's more than one `bool` parameter, because now you have the additional
problem of figuring out which parameter is which.

So how can we fix code like that example? One possibility is to do something
like this:

```c++ {.bad}
int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
  ParseCommandLineFlags(&argc, &argv, false /* preserve flags */);
}
```

The drawbacks of this approach are evident: it's not clear if that comment is
describing the meaning of the parameter or the effect of the argument. In other
words, is it saying that we're preserving the flags, or is it saying that it's
false that we're preserving the flags? Even if the comment manages to make that
clear, there's still a risk that the comment will get out of sync with the code.

A better approach is to specify the name of the parameter in the comment:

```c++
int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
  ParseCommandLineFlags(&argc, &argv, /*remove_flags=*/false);
}
```

This is much clearer, and much less likely to fall out of sync with the code.
[Clang-tidy will even
check](https://clang.llvm.org/extra/clang-tidy/checks/misc-argument-comment.html)
that the comment has the correct parameter name. A less ambiguous but longer
variant is to use an explanatory variable:

```c++
int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
  const bool remove_flags = false;
  ParseCommandLineFlags(&argc, &argv, remove_flags);
}
```

However, explanatory variable names are not checked by the compiler, and so they
may be erroneous. This is a particular problem when you have multiple `bool`
parameters, which might be transposed by the caller.

All these approaches also rely on programmers to consistently remember to add
these comments or variables, and to do so correctly (although clang-tidy will
check the correctness of parameter-name comments).

In many cases, the best solution is to avoid using `bool` parameters in the
first place, and use an `enum` instead. For example, `ParseCommandLineFlags`
could have been declared like this:

```c++
enum ShouldRemoveFlags { kDontRemoveFlags, kRemoveFlags };

void ParseCommandLineFlags(int* argc, char*** argv, ShouldRemoveFlags remove_flags);
```

so that the call could look like this:

```c++
int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
  ParseCommandLineFlags(&argc, &argv, kDontRemoveFlags);
}
```

You can also use an `enum class`, as described in http://abseil.io/tips/86, but
in that case you'd want to use a slightly different naming convention, e.g.:

```c++
enum class ShouldRemoveFlags { kNo, kYes };
…
int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
  ParseCommandLineFlags(&argc, &argv, ShouldRemoveFlags::kNo);
}
```

Obviously, this approach has to be implemented when the function is defined; you
can't really opt into it at the callsite (you can fake it, but for little
benefit). For example, we couldn't do this with `ParseCommandLineFlags` without
a major cleanup effort to migrate the existing callers. So when you're defining
a function, particularly if it's going to be widely used, the onus is on you to
think carefully about how the callsites will look, and in particular to be very
skeptical of `bool` parameters.

