---
title: "Tip of the Week #123: `absl::optional` and `std::unique_ptr`"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/123
type: markdown
---

Originally posted as totw/123 on 2016-09-06

By Alexey Sokolov [(sokolov@google.com)](mailto:sokolov@google.com) and 
Etienne Dechamps [(edechamps@google.com)](mailto:edechamps@google.com)

## How to Store Values

This tip discusses several ways of storing values. Here we use class member
variables as an example, but many of the points below also apply to local
variables.

```c++
#include <memory>
#include "third_party/absl/types/optional.h"
#include ".../bar.h"

class Foo {
  ...
 private:
  Bar val_;
  absl::optional<Bar> opt_;
  std::unique_ptr<Bar> ptr_;
};
```

### As a Bare Object

This is the simplest way. `val_` is constructed and destroyed at the beginning
of `Foo`'s constructor and at the end of `Foo`'s destructor, respectively. If
`Bar` has a default constructor, it doesn't even need to be initialized
explicitly.

`val_` is very safe to use, because its value can't be null. This removes a
class of potential bugs.

But bare objects are not very flexible:

*   The lifetime of `val_` is fundamentally tied to the lifetime of its parent
    `Foo` object, which is sometimes not desirable. If `Bar` supports move or
    swap operations, the contents of `val_` can be replaced using these
    operations, while any existing pointers or references to `val_` continue
    pointing or referring to the same `val_` object (as a container), not to the
    value stored in it.
*   Any arguments that need to be passed to `Bar`'s constructor need to be
    computed inside the initializer list of `Foo`'s constructor, which can be
    difficult if complicated expressions are involved.

### As `absl::optional<Bar>`

This is a good middle ground between the simplicity of bare objects and the
flexibility of `std::unique_ptr`. The object is stored inside `Foo` but, unlike
bare objects, `absl::optional` can be empty. It can be populated at any time by
assignment (`opt_ = ...`) or by constructing the object in place
(`opt_.emplace(...)`).

Because the object is stored inline, the usual caveats about allocating large
objects on the stack apply, just like for a bare object. Also be aware that an
empty `absl::optional` uses as much memory as a populated one.

Compared to a bare object, `absl::optional` has a few downsides:

*   It's less obvious for the reader where object construction and destruction
    occur.
*   There is a risk of accessing an object which does not exist.

### As `std::unique_ptr<Bar>`

This is the most flexible way. The object is stored outside of `Foo`. Just like
`absl::optional`, a `std::unique_ptr` can be empty. However, unlike
`absl::optional`, it is possible to transfer ownership of the object to
something else (through a move operation), to take ownership of the object from
something else (at construction or through assignment), or to assume ownership
of a raw pointer (at construction or through `ptr_ = absl::WrapUnique(...)`, see
[TotW 126](/tips/126).

When `std::unique_ptr` is null, it doesn't have the object allocated, and
consumes only the size of a pointer[^deleter].

Wrapping an object in a `std::unique_ptr` is necessary if the object may need to
outlive the scope of the `std::unique_ptr` (ownership transfer). 

This flexibility comes with some costs:

*   Increased cognitive load on the reader:
    *   It's less obvious what's stored inside (`Bar`, or something derived from
        `Bar`). However, it may also decrease the cognitive load, as the reader
        can focus only on the base interface held by the pointer.
    *   It's even less obvious than with `absl::optional` where object
        construction and destruction occur, because ownership of the object can
        be transferred.
*   As with `absl::optional`, there is a risk of accessing an object which does
    not exist - the famous null pointer dereference.
*   The pointer introduces an additional level of indirection, which requires a
    heap allocation, and is [not
    friendly](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locality_of_reference) to CPU
    caches; Whether this matters or not depends a lot on particular use cases.
*   `std::unique_ptr<Bar>` is not copyable even if `Bar` is. This also prevents
    `Foo` from being copyable. 

### Conclusion

As always, strive to avoid unnecessary complexity, and use the simplest thing
that works. Prefer bare object, if it works for your case. Otherwise, try
`absl::optional`. As a last resort, use `std::unique_ptr`.

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>`Bar`</td>
    <td>`absl::optional&lt;Bar&gt;`</td>
    <td>`std::unique_ptr&lt;Bar&gt;`</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Supports delayed construction</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>✓</td>
    <td>✓</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Always safe to access</td>
    <td>✓</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Can transfer ownership of `Bar`</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td>✓</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Can store subclasses of `Bar`</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td>✓</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Movable</td>
    <td>If `Bar` is movable</td>
    <td>If `Bar` is movable</td>
    <td>✓</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Copyable</td>
    <td>If `Bar` is copyable</td>
    <td>If `Bar` is copyable</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Friendly to CPU caches</td>
    <td>✓</td>
    <td>✓</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>No heap allocation overhead</td>
    <td>✓</td>
    <td>✓</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Memory usage</td>
    <td>`sizeof(Bar)`</td>
    <td>`sizeof(Bar) + sizeof(bool)`[^padding]</td>
    <td>`sizeof(Bar*)` when null, `sizeof(Bar*) + sizeof(Bar)` otherwise</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Object lifetime</td>
    <td>Same as enclosing scope</td>
    <td>Restricted to enclosing scope</td>
    <td>Unrestricted</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Call `f(Bar*)`</td>
    <td>`f(&val_)`</td>
    <td>`f(&opt_.value())` or `f(&*opt_)`</td>
    <td>`f(ptr_.get())` or `f(&*ptr_)`</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Remove value</td>
    <td>N/A</td>
    <td>`opt_.reset();` or `opt_ = absl::nullopt;`</td>
    <td>`ptr_.reset();` or `ptr_ = nullptr;`</td>
  </tr>
</table>
[^deleter]: In case of a non-empty custom deleter there is also an additional
    space for that deleter.
[^padding]: Also padding may be added.
