---
title: "Tip of the Week #24: Copies, Abbrv."
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/24
type: markdown
order: "024"
---

Originally posted as TotW #24 on Nov 26, 2012

*by Titus Winters, [(titus@google.com)](mailto:titus@gmail.com) and
Chandler Carruth [(chandlerc@google.com)](mailto:chandlerc@google.com)*

*"To copy others is necessary, but to copy oneself is pathetic." - Pablo
Picasso*

## One Name, No Copy; Two Names, Two Copies

When evaluating whether copies get made within any given scope (including cases
triggering RVO), check how many names your data refers to.

**You will have two copies of the data at any point where you have two live
names for those copies.** To a good first approximation, the compiler will (and
often must) elide copies in all other cases.

Between the move semantics of STL containers (introduced automatically with
the switch to C++11) and copy constructor elision by the compiler, we are
rapidly converging on this rule providing not merely a lower bound on the number
of copies, but a guarantee. If your benchmarks show that more copies are being
made, it is **likely a compiler bug**; your compiler probably needs a fix.

So if your code is structured such that there are two names for the data at some
point during the execution, you should expect a copy. If you avoid introducing a
name which could possibly refer to the data, you'll help ensure the compiler can
remove the copy.

## Examples

Let's look at some examples of how this works in practice:

```c++
std::string build();

std::string foo(std::string arg) {
  return arg;  // no copying here, only one name for the data “arg”.
}

void bar() {
  std::string local = build();  // only 1 instance -- only 1 name

  // no copying, a reference won’t incur a copy
  std::string& local_ref = local;

  // one copy operation, there are now two named collections of data.
  std::string second = foo(local);
}
```

Most of the time, none of this matters. It is far more important to ensure that
your code is readable and consistent, rather than worrying about copies and
performance. As always: profile before you optimize. But, if you find yourself
writing code from scratch -- and can provide a clean and consistent API that
returns its values -- don’t discount code that seems like it would make copies:
everything you learned about copies in C++ a decade ago is wrong.
