---
title: "Tip of the Week #88: Initialization: =, (), and {}"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/88
type: markdown
order: "088"
---

Originally posted as TotW #88 on Jan 27, 2015

*by Titus Winters (who/titus), on behalf of the C++ Style Arbiters*

C++11 provided a new syntax referred to as "uniform initialization syntax" that
was supposed to unify all of the various styles of initialization, avoid the
[Most Vexing Parse](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Most_vexing_parse), and avoid
narrowing conversions. This new mechanism means we now have
[yet another](https://xkcd.com/927/) syntax for initialization, with its own
tradeoffs.

## C++11 Brace Initialization

Some uniform initialization syntax proponents would suggest that we use {}s and
direct initialization (no use of the ‘=’, although in most cases both forms call
the same constructor) for initialization of all types:

```c++
int x{2};
string foo{"Hello World"};
std::vector<int> v{1, 2, 3};
```

vs. (for instance):

```c++
int x = 2;
string foo = "Hello World";
std::vector<int> v = {1, 2, 3};
```

This approach has two shortcomings. First, "uniform" is a stretch: there are
cases where ambiguity still exists (for the casual reader, not the compiler) in
what is being called and how.

```c++
std::vector<string> strings{2}; // A vector of two empty strings.
std::vector<int> ints{2};       // A vector containing only the integer 2.
```

Second: this syntax is not exactly intuitive: no other common language uses
something like it. The language can certainly introduce new and surprising
syntax, and there are technical reasons why it’s necessary in some cases. The
important question is: how much should we change our habits and language
understanding to take advantage of that change? Are the benefits worth the cost
in changing our habits or our existing code? For uniform initialization syntax,
we don’t believe in general that the benefits outweigh the drawbacks.

## Best Practices for Initialization

Instead, we recommend the following guidelines for "How do I initialize a
variable?", both to follow in your own code and to cite in your code reviews:

* **Use assignment syntax when initializing directly with the intended literal
  value (for example: ints, floats, strings), with smart pointers such as
  `std::shared_ptr`, `std::unique_ptr`, with containers (`std::vector`,
  `std::map`, etc), when performing struct initialization, or doing copy
  construction.**

  ```cpp
  int x = 2;
  string foo = "Hello World";
  std::vector<int> v = {1, 2, 3};
  std::unique_ptr<Matrix> matrix = NewMatrix(rows, cols);
  MyStruct x = {true, 5.0};
  MyProto copied_proto = original_proto;
  ```

  instead of:

  ```cpp
  int x{2};
  string foo{"Hello World"};
  std::vector<int> v{1, 2, 3};
  std::unique_ptr<Matrix> matrix{NewMatrix(rows, cols)};
  MyStruct x{true, 5.0};
  MyProto copied_proto{original_proto};
  ```
   
* **Use the traditional constructor syntax (with parentheses) when the
  initialization is performing some active logic, rather than simply composing
  values together.**

  ```cpp
  Frobber frobber(size, &bazzer_to_duplicate);
  EventManager event_manager(options);
  std::vector<double> fifty_pies(50, 3.14);
  ```

  vs.

  ```cpp
  Frobber frobber{size, &bazzer_to_duplicate};
  ```
  
* **Use {} initialization without the = only if the above options don’t
  compile:**

  ```cpp
  class Foo {
   public:
    Foo(int a, int b, int c) : array_{a, b, c} {}

   private:
    int array_[5];
    // Requires {}s because the constructor is marked explicit
    // and the type is non-copyable.
    EventManager em{EventManager::Options()};
  };
  ```

* **Never mix {}s and auto.**<br/>
  For example, don’t do this:

  ```cpp
  // Bad code
  auto x{1};
  auto y = {2}; // This is a std::initializer_list<int>!
  ```

  (For the language lawyers: prefer copy-initialization over
  direct-initialization when available, and use parentheses over curly braces
  when resorting to direct-initialization.)

Perhaps the best overall description of the issue is Herb Sutter’s
[GotW post](http://herbsutter.com/2013/05/09/gotw-1-solution/). Although he
shows examples that include direct initialization of `int` with braces, his
final advice is roughly compatible with what we present here with one caveat:
where Herb says "where you prefer to see only the = sign", we unambiguously
prefer to see exactly that.

## Conclusion

The tradeoffs for uniform initialization syntax are not generally worth it: our
compilers already warn against the Most Vexing Parse (you can use brace
initialization or add parens to resolve the issue), and the safety from
narrowing conversions isn’t worth the readability hit for brace-initialization
(we’ll need a different solution for narrowing conversions, eventually). The
Style Arbiters don’t think this issue is critical enough to make a formal rule
on, especially because there are cases (notably in generic code) where brace
initialization may be justified. But as general guidance, we don’t believe the
hype about uniform initialization syntax.
