---
title: "Tip of the Week #136: Unordered Containers"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/136
type: markdown
order: "136"
---

Originally posted as TotW #136 on June 23, 2017

*By [Matt Kulukundis](mailto:kfm@google.com)*

Updated 2020-03-31

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/136](https://abseil.io/tips/136)


*"Sometimes, when the material is really good, you put expectations on yourself
to make it the best possible show. You're not just serving up the regular hash
and doing your job and going home."* â€” Peter Dinklage

TL;DR: See https://abseil.io/docs/cpp/guides/container for official and
up-to-date recommendations. This tip *introduced* the new types, but is not the
canonical reference.

## Introducing `absl::*_hash_map`

There is a new family of associative containers in town. They boast improvements
to efficiency and provide early access to APIs from C++17. They also provide
developers with direct control over their implementation and default hash
functions, which is important for the long term evolution of a code base. New
code should prefer these types over `std::unordered_map` . All of the maps and
sets in this family have APIs that are nearly identical to `std::unordered_map`,
so transitioning to them is easy.

For every `absl::*_hash_map` there is also an `absl::*_hash_set`; however, the
diagrams will only depict the `map` case and we will often refer to just the
`map`.

### `absl::flat_hash_map` and `absl::flat_hash_set`

<img src="/img/flat_hash_map.svg" style="margin:5px;width:50%" alt="Flat Hash Map Memory Layout"/&gt;

These should be your default choice. They store their `value_type` inside the
main array. Because they move data when they rehash, elements don't get pointer
stability. If you need pointer stability or your values are large, consider
using `absl::node_hash_map` instead, or `absl::flat_hash_map&lt;Key,
std::unique_ptr&lt;Value&gt;>`, possibly.

### `absl::node_hash_map` and `absl::node_hash_set`

<img src="/img/node_hash_map.svg" style="margin:5px;width:50%" alt="Node Hash Map Memory L ayout"/&gt;

These allocate their `value_type` in nodes outside of the main array (like
`std::unordered_map`). Because of the separate allocation, they provide pointer
stability (the address of objects stored in the map does not change) for the
stored data and empty slots only require 8 bytes. Additionally, they can store
things that are neither moveable nor copyable.

We generally recommend that you use `absl::flat_hash_map&lt;K, std::unique_ptr&lt;V&gt;>`
instead of `absl::node_hash_map&lt;K, V&gt;`, and similarly for `node_hash_set`.
