---
title: "Tip of the Week #3: String Concatenation and operator+ vs. StrCat()"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/3
type: markdown
order: "003"
---

Originally published as totw/3 on 2012-05-11

Updated 2017-09-18; revised 2018-01-22

Users are often surprised when a reviewer says, "Don't use the string
concatenation operator, it's not that efficient." How can it be that
`string::operator+` is inefficient? Isn't it hard to get that wrong?

It turns out, such inefficiency isn’t clear cut. These two snippets have
close to the same execution time, in practice:

```cpp
string foo = LongString1();
string bar = LongString2();
string foobar = foo + bar;

string foo = LongString1();
string bar = LongString2();
string foobar = absl::StrCat(foo, bar);
```

However, the same is not true for these two snippets:

```cpp
string foo = LongString1();
string bar = LongString2();
string baz = LongString3();
string foobar = foo + bar + baz;

string foo = LongString1();
string bar = LongString2();
string baz = LongString3();
string foobar = absl::StrCat(foo, bar, baz);
```

The reason these two cases differ can be understood when we pick apart what is
happening in the expression `foo + bar + baz`. Since there are no overloads for
three-argument operators in C++, this operation is necessarily going to make two
calls to `string::operator+`. And between those two calls, the operation will
construct (and store) a temporary string. So `string foobar = foo + bar + baz`
is really equivalent to:

```cpp
string temp = foo + bar;
string foobar = std::move(temp) + baz;
```

Specifically, note that the contents of `foo` and `bar` must be copied to a
temporary location before they are placed within `foobar`. (For more on
`std::move`, see [Tip of the Week #77: Temporaries, moves, and copies]
(tips/77).)

C++11 at least allows the second concatenation to happen without creating a new
string object: `std::move(temp) + baz` is equivalent to
`std::move(temp.append(baz))`. However, it's possible that the buffer initially
allocated for the temporary won't be large enough to hold the final string, in
which case a reallocation (and another copy) will be required. As a result, in
the worst case, chains of `n` string concatenations require O(n) reallocations.

It is better instead to use `absl::StrCat()`, a nice helper function from
[absl/strings/str_cat.h][str_cat] that calculates the necessary string
length, reserves that size, and concatenates all of the input data into the
output - a well-optimized O(n). Similarly, for cases like:

```cpp
foobar += foo + bar + baz;
```

use `absl::StrAppend()`, which performs similar optimizations:

```cpp
absl::StrAppend(&foobar, foo, bar, baz);
```

As well, `absl::StrCat()` and `absl::StrAppend()` operate on types other than
just string types: you can use `absl::StrCat`/`absl::StrAppend` to convert
`int32`, `uint32`, `int64`, `uint64`, `float`, `double`, `const char*`, and
`string_view`, like this:

```cpp
string foo = absl::StrCat("The year is ", year);
```

```cpp
printf("%s\n", sv.data()); // DON’T DO THIS
```

However, the following is fine:

```cpp
printf("%.*s\n", static_cast<int>(sv.size()), sv.data());
```

*  You can output a `string_view` just like you would a string or a
  `const char*`:

```cpp
std::cout << "Took '" << s << "'";
```

* You can convert an existing routine that accepts `const string&` or
  NUL-terminated `const char*` to `string_view` safely in most cases. The only
  danger we have encountered in performing this operation is if the address of
  the function has been taken, this will result in a build break as the
  resulting function-pointer type will be different.

[str_cat]: https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/strings/str_cat.h