---
title: "Tip of the Week #144: Heterogeneous Lookup in Associative Containers"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/144
type: markdown
order: "144"
---

Originally posted as TotW #144 on March 23, 2018

*By [Samuel Benzaquen](mailto:sbenza@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/144](https://abseil.io/tips/144)


## Introduction

Associative containers associate an element with a key. Inserting into or
looking up an element from the container requires an equivalent key. In general,
containers require the keys to be of a specific type, which can lead to
inefficiencies at call sites that need to convert between near-equivalent types
(like `std::string` and `absl::string_view`).

To avoid this unnecessary work, some containers provide *heterogeneous lookup*.
This feature allows callers to pass keys of any type (as long as the
user-specified comparator functor supports them). See
[std::map::find](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/map/find) for an
example of this feature in an STL container.

## Transparent Functors

A transparent functor is one that accepts more than one particular type. It
*must* publicize this fact by providing an `is_transparent` inner type. The
actual definition of this inner type is not relevant as it is used merely as a
tag. It is common to use a `using` declaration of `is_transparent` set to
`void`.

When a container detects a transparent functor their lookup functions will
forward the user specified value intact instead of converting it to `key_type`
first (through implicit or explicit conversion).

Implicitly supporting heterogeneous lookup can be dangerous, as the relationship
between values might not be maintained after conversions. For example, `1.0 <
1.1`, but `static_cast<int>(1.0) == static_cast<int>(1.1)`. Thus, using a
`double` to look up a value in a `std::set<int>` could lead to incorrect
results. These potential bugs are the reason this feature is opt-in.

## Using Heterogeneous Lookup For Performance

One common reason for using heterogeneous lookup is performance. We could
construct the `key_type`, but doing so requires non-trivial work that we would
rather avoid. For example:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
std::map&lt;std::string, int&gt; m = ...;
absl::string_view some_key = ...;
// Construct a temporary `std::string` to do the query.
// The allocation + copy + deallocation might dominate the find() call.
auto it = m.find(std::string(some_key));
</pre>

Instead, we can use a transparent comparator like so:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct StringCmp {
  using is_transparent = void;
  bool operator()(absl::string_view a, absl::string_view b) const {
    return a &lt; b;
  }
};

std::map&lt;std::string, int, StringCmp&gt; m = ...;
absl::string_view some_key = ...;
// The comparator `StringCmp` will accept any type that is implicitly
// convertible to `absl::string_view` and says so by declaring the
// `is_transparent` tag.
// We can pass `some_key` to `find()` without converting it first to
// `std::string`. In this case, that avoids the unnecessary memory allocation
// required to construct the `std::string` instance.
auto it = m.find(some_key);
</pre>

## What Else Is It Good For?

Cases exist where it is impossible or inconvenient to create a valid `key_type`
object just to do a lookup. In those cases, we might want to use an alternative
type that is much easier to produce, but contains the necessary information for
the lookup. For example:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct ThreadCmp {
  using is_transparent = void;
  // Regular overload.
  bool operator()(const std::thread& a, const std::thread& b) const {
    return a.get_id() &lt; b.get_id();
  }
  // Transparent overloads
  bool operator()(const std::thread& a, std::thread::id b) const {
    return a.get_id() &lt; b;
  }
  bool operator()(std::thread::id a, const std::thread& b) const {
    return a &lt; b.get_id();
  }
  bool operator()(std::thread::id a, std::thread::id b) const {
    return a &lt; b;
  }
};

std::set&lt;std::thread, ThreadCmp&gt; threads = ...;
// Can't construct an instance of `std::thread` with the same id, just to do the lookup.
// But we can look up by id instead.
std::thread::id id = ...;
auto it = threads.find(id);

</pre>

## STL Container Support and Alternatives

Ordered containers (`std::{map,set,multimap,multiset}`) support heterogeneous
lookup starting in `C++14`. As of `C++17`, unordered containers still do not
support it. There are proposals for adding this feature, but none have been
accepted yet.

The new family of [Swiss Tables][swisstables], however, support heterogeneous
lookup for both string-like types (`std::string`, `absl::string_view`, etc.) and
smart pointers (`T*`,`std::shared_ptr`, `std::unique_ptr`). They require both
the hasher and the equality function to be tagged as transparent. All other key
types require explicit opt-in from the user.

The [B-Tree][btree] containers (`absl::btree_{set,map,multiset,multimap}`) also
support heterogeneous lookup.

\[swisstables]: https://abseil.io/docs/cpp/guides/container [btree]: go/btree
