---
title: "Tip of the Week #117: Object Lifetimes vs. `=delete`"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/117
type: markdown
order: "117"
---

Originally posted as TotW #117 on June 8, 2016

*by Geoff Romer, [(gromer@google.com)](mailto:gromer@gmail.com)*

*"Everything is so far away, a copy of a copy of a copy. The insomnia distance
of everything, you can't touch anything and nothing can touch you." — Chuck
Palahniuk*

Suppose you have a class like this:

```c++
class Widget {
 public:
  …

 private:
  string name_;
};
```

How would you write its constructor? For years, the answer has been to do it
like this:

```c++
// First constructor version
explicit Widget(const std::string& name) : name_(name) {}
```

However, there is an alternative approach which is becoming more common:

```c++
// Second constructor version
explicit Widget(std::string name) : name_(std::move(name)) {}
```

(If you're not familiar with `std::move()`, see [TotW #117](/tips/117), or
pretend I used `std::swap` instead; the same principles apply). What's going
on here? Isn't it horribly expensive to pass `std::string` by copy? It turns
out that no, sometimes passing by value (as we'll see, it's not really "by
copy") can be much more efficient than passing by reference.

To understand why, consider what happens when the callsite looks like this:

```c++
Widget widget(absl::StrCat(bar, baz));
```

With the first version of the `Widget` constructor, `absl::StrCat()` produces
a temporary string containing the concatenated string values, which is
passed by reference into `Widget()`, and then the string is copied into
`name_`. With the second version of the `Widget` constructor, the temporary
string is passed into `Widget()` by value, which you might think would cause
the string to be copied, but this is where the magic happens. When the
compiler sees a temporary being used to copy-construct an object, the
compiler will[^1] simply use the same storage for both the temporary and
the new object, so that copying from the one to the other is literally free;
this is called _copy elision_. Thanks to this optimization, the string is
never copied, but only moved once, which is a cheap constant-time operation.

[^1]: Strictly speaking the compiler is not _required_ to perform copy elision,
    but it is such a powerful and vitally important optimization that it is
    extremely unlikely that you will ever encounter a compiler that doesn't do
    it.

Consider what happens when the argument isn't a temporary:

```c++
string local_str;
Widget widget(local_str);
```

In this case, both versions of the code make a copy of the string, but the
second version also moves the string. That, again, is a cheap constant-time
operation, whereas copying is a linear-time operation, so in many cases that
will be a price well worth paying.

The key property of the `name` parameter that makes this technique work is that
`name` has to be copied. Indeed, the essence of this technique is to try to make
the copy operation happen on the function call boundary, where it can be elided,
rather than in the interior of the function. This need not necessarily involve
`std::move()`; for example, if the function needs to mutate the copy rather than
store it, it may just be mutated in place.

## When to Use Copy Elision

Passing parameters by value has several drawbacks which should be borne in mind.
First of all, it makes the function body more complex, which creates a
maintenance and readability burden. For example, in the code above, we've added
a `std::move()` call, which creates a risk of accidentally accessing a moved-from
value. In this function that risk is pretty minimal, but if the function were
more complex, the risk would be higher.

Second, it can degrade performance, sometimes in surprising ways. It can
sometimes be difficult to tell whether it's a net performance win without
profiling a specific workload.

*   As stated above, this technique applies only to parameters that need to be
    copied; it will be useless at best and harmful at worst when applied to
    parameters that don't need to be copied, or only need to be copied
    conditionally.
*   This technique often involves some amount of extra work in the function
    body, such as the move assignment in the example above. If that extra work
    imposes too much overhead, the slowdown in the cases where the copy can't be
    elided may not be worth the speedup in the cases where the copy can be
    elided. Note that this determination can depend on the particulars of your
    use case. For example, if the arguments to `Widget()` are almost always very
    short, or are almost never temporaries, this technique may be harmful on
    balance. As always when considering optimization tradeoffs, when in doubt,
    measure.
*   When the copy in question is a copy *assignment* (for example if we wanted
    to add a `set_name()` method to `Widget`), the pass-by-reference version can
    sometimes avoid memory allocation by reusing `name_`'s existing buffer, in
    cases where the pass-by-value version would allocate new memory. In
    addition, the fact that pass-by-value always replaces `name_`'s allocation
    can lead to worse allocation behavior down the line: if the `name_` field
    tends to grow over time after it is set, that growth will require further
    new allocations in the pass-by-value case, whereas in the pass-by-reference
    case we only reallocate when the `name_` field exceeds its historical
    maximum size.

Generally speaking, you should prefer simpler, safer, more readable code, and
only go for something more complex if you have concrete evidence that the
complex version performs better and that the difference matters. That principle
certainly applies to this technique: passing by const reference is simpler and
safer, so it's still a good default choice. However, if you're working in an
area that's known to be performance-sensitive, or your benchmarks show that
you're spending too much time copying function parameters, passing by value can
be a very useful tool to have in your toolbox.

## Related Reading

*   [C++ Primer: Copying, Moving, and Elision]
    (http://go/cppprimer#copying_moving)
