---
title: "Tip of the Week #149: Object Lifetimes vs. `=delete`"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/149
type: markdown
order: "149"
---

Originally posted as TotW #148 on May 3, 2018

*by Titus Winters, [(titus@google.com)](mailto:titus@gmail.com)*

*Into the blue again after the money's gone<br/>
Once in a lifetime, water flowing underground --David Byrne*

## `=delete` for Lifetimes

Imagine you have an API that requires a reference to some long-lived object, but
doesn't take ownership of it.

```cpp
class Request {
  ...

  // The provided Context must live as long as the current Request.
  void SetContext(const Context& context);
```

You think to yourself, "Hey, what happens if someone passes a temporary? That's
going to be a bug. But this is modern C++, I can prevent that!" So you rig
together a change in the API, adding a deleted overload.

```cpp
class Request {
  ...

  // The provided Context must live as long as the current Request.
  void SetContext(const Context& context);
  void SetContext(Context&& context) = delete;
```

Pleased with your work, you think "Hey, now the API says everything, the comment
isn't necessary."

```cpp
class Request {
  ...

  void SetContext(const Context& context);
  void SetContext(Context&& context) = delete;
```

Was this a good idea? Why or why not?

## Don't Design In a Vaccuum

As presented, you might think that this is a good idea. However, as in many
cases of API design it is *tempting* to look at the definition of the API, but
more *useful* to look at how the API is used. So lets replay this scenario,
taking into account usage.

A user attempting to use the original `SetContext()`, trying to get something
simple to build and not knowing where to find the right `Context` object, just
makes the suggested call.

```cpp
request.SetContext(Context{});
```

Without your `=delete` change, this builds, but fails at runtime (probably in a
mysterious fashion). When looking at the `SetContext` API, the lifetime
requirement is documented, and the code is changed to comply.

```cpp
request.SetContext(request2.context());
```

A user attempting to use the "improved" `SetContext()` with your `=delete`
change and no comment, on the other hand, first encounters the build break:

```
error: call to deleted function 'SetContext'

  SetContext(Context{});
  ^~~~~~~~~~

<source>:4:6: note: candidate function has been explicitly deleted

void SetContext(Context&& context) = delete;
```

The user then thinks "Well, I can't pass a temporary", but having no information
about the actual requirement, what is the most likely fix?

```cpp
Context context;
request.SetContext(context);
```

Now, the crux of the matter: How likely is it that the scope of the new
automatic variable `context` is the right lifetime for this call? If your answer
is anything less than 100%, the lifetime requirement comment is still necessary.

```cpp
class Request {
  ...

  // The provided Context must live as long as the current Request.
  void SetContext(const Context& context);
  void SetContext(Context&& context) = delete;
```

Deleting a member of an overload set in this fashion is at best a half-measure.
Yes, you avoid one class of bugs, but you also complicate the API. Relying on
such a design is a sure-fire way to get a false sense of security: the C++ type
system is simply not capable of encoding the necessary details about lifespan
requirements for parameters.

Since the type system can't actually get this right, we recommend you not
complicate things with half-measures. Keep it simple - don't try to rely on this
pattern to disallow temporaries, it doesn't work well enough to help.

## `=delete` for "Optimization"

Let's flip the situation around: perhaps it isn't that you want to prevent
temporaries, maybe you want to prevent copies.

```cpp
future<bool> DNAScan(Config c, const std::string& sequence) = delete;
future<bool> DNAScan(Config c, std::string&& sequence);
```

How likely is it that a caller of your API will never need to keep their value?
If you cannot be 100% sure that you know exactly how your API will be used, this
is a recipe for annoying your users. Consider making copies and invoking such an
API given normal (non-deleted) design:

```cpp
Config c1 = GetConfig();
Config c2 = GetConfig();
std::string s = GetDNA();

// Kick off scans for both configs.
auto scan1 = DNAScan(c1, s);
auto scan2 = DNAScan(c2, std::move(s));
```

Since we see that the second scan is the last use of `s`, we can just
`std::move` into the value-consuming call. With the "cleverly optimized"
version, the code gets more sloppy looking.

```cpp
Config c1 = GetConfig();
Config c2 = GetConfig();
std::string s = GetDNA();
std::string s2 = s;

// Kick off scans for both configs.
auto scan1 = DNAScan(c1, std::move(s));
auto scan2 = DNAScan(c2, std::move(s2));
```

APIs are provided as building blocks and abstractions - the ecosystem of APIs is
a platform to be assembled together in new and surprising ways that are more
than what the provider of any single API might predict. Believing that you know
certainly that nobody should ever make a copy runs counter to that. Further, the
problem of inefficiency and copying when moving would suffice is far broader
than any single API, and likely better solved with some combination of
profiling, training, code review, and static analysis.

In the rare case when you *can* know for sure that an API has to be used in a
particular fashion: you probably should encode that in the types in question.
Don't operate on `std::string` as your representation of a DNA sequence; write
a `DNA` class and make it move-only with an explicit (easy to scan for) way to
do the expensive copy operation. Put another way: properties of types should be
expressed in those types, not in the APIs that operate on them.

### Ref-qualification

As a side note: it's possible to apply the same reasoning for ref-qualifiers on
destructive accessors. Consider a class like `std::stringbuf` - in C++20 it will
gain an accessor to consume the contained string, presented as an overload set
with the existing accessor:

```cpp
const std::string& str() const &;
std::string& str() &&; 
```

(See [TotW #148](/tips/148) for more info on reference-qualified methods and
overload sets). Looking at existing usage of `std::stringbuf`, nearly every use
has a single `stringbuf` that is used to produce one string. Ignoring the legacy
code, would it not be best to enforce that, and provide *only* the "efficient"
ref-qualified destructive member?

Of course not, for similar reasons to the `DNAScan` example above: you cannot
know certainly that nobody needs it, and it's not *unsafe* to provide the const
overload. Use ref-qualifiers only as an overload set for optimization, or when
the ref-qualifiers are necessary to enforce semantic correctness.

## Summary

It is tempting to try to use rvalue-references or reference qualifiers in
conjunction with `=delete` to provide a more "user friendly" API, enforcing
lifetimes or preventing optimization problems. In practice, those are usually
bad temptations. Lifetime requirements are much more complicated than the C++
type system can express. API providers can rarely predict every future valid
usage of their API. Avoiding these types of `=delete` tricks keeps things
simple.
