# Tip of the Week #93: using <code>absl::Span</code>

[Tip #93](/tips/93)

*by Samuel Benzaquen (sbenza@)*

At Google we are accustomed to using `string_view` as function parameters and
return types when we want to deal with unowned strings. It can make the API more
flexible and it can improve performance by avoiding unneeded conversions to
`string`. ([Tip #1](/tips/1))

`string_view` has a more generic cousin called `absl::Span`
(google3/third_party/absl/types/span.h). Note that though `absl::Span` is
similar in utility to `std::span`, available in C++ 20, the two types are not
exchangeable.

`Span<const T>` is to `std::vector<T>` what `string_view` is to `string`. It
provides a read-only interface to the elements of the vector, but it can also be
constructed from non-vector types (like arrays and initializer lists) without
incurring the cost of copying the elements.

The `const` can be dropped, so where `Span<const T>` is a view into an array
whose elements can't be mutated, `Span<T>` allows non-const access to the
elements. Unlike spans of const, however, these require explicit construction.

## As Function Parameters

Some of the benefits of using `Span` as a function parameter are similar to
those of using `string_view`.

The caller can pass a slice of the original vector, or pass a plain array. It is
also compatible with other array-like containers, like `InlinedVector`,
`FixedArray`, `proto2::RepeatedField`, etc.

As with `string_view`, it is usually better to pass `Span` by value when used as
a function parameter - this form is slightly faster, and produces smaller code.

Example:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void TakesVector(const std::vector&lt;int&gt;& ints);
void TakesSpan(absl::Span&lt;const int&gt; ints);

void PassOnlyFirst3Elements() {
  std::vector&lt;int&gt; ints = MakeInts();
  // We need to create a temporary vector, and incur an allocation and a copy.
  TakesVector(std::vector&lt;int&gt;(ints.begin(), ints.begin() + 3));
  // No copy or allocations are made when using Span.
  TakesSpan(absl::Span&lt;const int&gt;(ints.data(), 3));
}

void PassALiteral() {
  // This creates a temporary std::vector&lt;int&gt;.
  TakesVector({1, 2, 3});
  // Span does not need a temporary allocation and copy, so it is faster.
  TakesSpan({1, 2, 3});
}
void IHaveAnArray() {
  int values[10] = ...;
  // Once more, a temporary std::vector&lt;int&gt; is created.
  TakesVector(std::vector&lt;int&gt;(std::begin(values), std::end(values)));
  // Just pass the array. Span detects the size automatically.
  // No copy was made.
  TakesSpan(values);
}
</pre>

## Const Correctness for Vector of Pointers

A big problem with passing around `std::vector<T*>` is that you can’t make the
pointees const without changing the type of the container.

Any function taking a `const std::vector<T*>&` will not be able to modify the
vector, but it can modify the `T`s. This also applies to accessors that return a
`const std::vector<T*>&`. You can’t prevent the caller from modifying the `T`s.

Common “solutions” include copying or casting the vector into the right type.
These solutions are slow (for the copy) or undefined behavior (for the cast) and
should be avoided. Instead, use `Span`.

### Example: Function Parameter

Consider these `Frob` variants:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void FrobFastWeak(const std::vector&lt;Foo*&gt;& v);
void FrobSlowStrong(const std::vector&lt;const Foo*&gt;& v);
void FrobFastStrong(absl::Span&lt;const Foo* const&gt; v);
</pre>

Starting with a `const std::vector<Foo*>& v` that needs frobbing, you have two
imperfect options and one good one.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// fast and easy to type but not const-safe
FrobFastWeak(v);
// slow and noisy, but safe.
FrobSlowStrong(std::vector&lt;const Foo*&gt;(v.begin(), v.end()));
// fast, safe, and clear!
FrobFastStrong(v);
</pre>

### Example: Accessor

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class MyClass {
 public:
  // This is supposed to be const.
  // Don’t modify my Foos, pretty please.
  const std::vector&lt;Foo*&gt;& shallow_foos() const { return foos_; }
  // Really deep const.
  absl::Span&lt;const Foo* const&gt; deep_foos() const { return foos_; }

 private:
  std::vector&lt;Foo*&gt; foos_;
};
void Caller(const MyClass* my_class) {
  // Accidental violation of MyClass::shallow_foos() contract.
  my_class-&gt;shallow_foos()[0]-&gt;SomeNonConstOp();
  // This one doesn't compile.
  // my_class-&gt;deep_foos()[0]-&gt;SomeNonConstOp();
}
</pre>

## Conclusion

When used appropriately, `absl::Span` can provide decoupling, const correctness
and a performance benefit.

It is important to note that `Span` behaves much like `string_view` by being a
reference to some externally owned data. All the same warnings apply. In
particular, a `Span` must not outlive the data it refers to.
