---
title: "Tip of the Week #153: Don't use using-directives"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/153
type: markdown
order: "153"
---

Originally posted as TotW #153 on July 17, 2018

*by Roman Perepelitsa
[(roman.perepelitsa@gmail.com)](mailto:roman.perepelitsa@gmail.com) and Ashley
Hedberg [(ahedberg@google.com)](mailto:ahedberg@google.com)*

**I view using-directives as time-bombs, both for the parties that deal in them
and the language system.** -- *Ashley Hedberg* with apologies to Warren Buffett

## tl;dr

Using-directives (`using namespace foo`) are dangerous enough to be banned by
the [Google style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html).
Don't use them in code that will ever need to be upgraded.

These are not to be confused with using-declarations (`using ::foo::SomeName`),
which are permitted in `*.cc` files.

## Using-directives at Function Scope

What do you think this code does?

```c++
namespace totw {
namespace example {
namespace {

TEST(MyTest, UsesUsingDirectives) {
  using namespace ::testing;
  Sequence seq;  // ::testing::Sequence
  WallTimer timer;  // ::WallTimer
  ...
}

}  // namespace
}  // namespace example
}  // namespace totw
```

The vast majority of C++ users think that the using-directive is injecting names
into the scope where it's declared. In the example above, that would be the
scope of the function. In reality, the names are injected into the nearest
common ancestor of the target namespace (`::testing`) and the usage namespace
(`::totw::example::anomymous`). In our example, **that's the global namespace**!

Thus, the code is roughly equivalent to the following:

```c++
using ::testing::Expectation;
using ::testing::Sequence;
using ::testing::UnorderedElementsAre;
...
// many, many more symbols are injected into the global namespace

namespace totw {
namespace example {
namespace {

TEST(MyTest, UsesUsingDirectives) {
  Sequence seq; // ::testing::Sequence
  WallTimer timer; // ::WallTimer
  ...
}

} // namespace
} // namespace example
} // namespace totw
```

Let's see what kind of changes can break this code:

*   If anyone defines `::totw::Sequence` or `::totw::example::Sequence`, `seq`
    will now refer to that entity instead of `::testing::Sequence`.
*   If anyone defines `::Sequence`, the definition of `seq` will fail to
    compile, as the reference to the name `Sequence` will be ambiguous.
    `Sequence` could mean `::testing::Sequence` or `::Sequence`, and the
    compiler doesn't know which one you wanted.
*   If anyone defines `::testing::WallTimer`, the definition of `timer` will
    fail to compile.

Thus, a single using-directive in a function scope has placed naming
restrictions on symbols in `::testing`, `::totw`, `::totw::example`, and the
global namespace. **Allowing this using-directive, even if only in function
scope, creates ample opportunities for name clashes in the global and other
namespaces.**

If that example doesn't look fragile enough, consider this:

```c++
namespace totw {
namespace example {
namespace {

TEST(MyTest, UsesUsingDirectives) {
  using namespace ::testing;
  EXPECT_THAT(..., proto::Partially(...)); // ::testing::proto::Partially
  ...
}

} // namespace
} // namespace example
} // namespace totw
```

This using-directive has basically **introduced a namespace alias** `proto` in
the global namespace, roughly equivalent to the following:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
namespace proto = ::testing::proto;

namespace totw {
namespace example {
namespace {

TEST(MyTest, UsesUsingDirectives) {
  EXPECT_THAT(..., proto::Partially(...)); // ::testing::proto::Partially
  ...
}

} // namespace
} // namespace example
} // namespace totw
</pre>

The test will keep compiling until a header defining namespace `::proto`,
`::totw::proto`, or `::totw::example::proto` gets included transitively. At that
point in time, `proto::Partially` becomes ambiguous, and the test stops
compiling.

One might think that it's safe to employ a using-directive for a closed
namespace that has few symbols and guarantees that no more symbols will be ever
added to it. (`std::placeholders`, which contains symbols `_1` ... `_9`, is an
example of such a namespace.) However, even that isn't safe: it precludes any
other namespace from introducing symbols with the same names. In this sense,
using-directives defeat the modularity provided by namespaces.

## Unqualified using-directives

We've seen how one using-directive can go wrong. What happens if we have many of
them, unqualified, in the same codebase?

```c++
namespace totw {
namespace example {
namespace {

using namespace rpc;
using namespace testing;

TEST(MyTest, UsesUsingDirectives) {
  Sequence seq;  // ::testing::Sequence
  WallTimer timer;  // ::WallTimer
  RPC rpc;  // ...is this ::rpc::RPC or ::RPC?
  ...
}

}  // namespace
}  // namespace example
}  // namespace totw
```

What could possibly go wrong here? A lot, as it turns out:

*   All the problems from our function-level example still exist, but two-fold:
    once for namespace `::testing`, and once for namespace `::rpc`.
*   If namespace `::rpc` and namespace `::testing` declare symbols with the same
    name, this code won't compile if it does unqualified lookup on one of those
    names. This is important, because it demonstrates a terrifying scaling
    problem: since the full contents of each namespace is (generally speaking)
    injected into the global namespace, **every new using-directive could add
    quadratic risk of name collisions and build failures.**
*   If a sub-namespace such as `::rpc::testing` is ever introduced, this code
    will stop compiling. (We have actually seen that namespace, so it is
    potentially just a matter of time until this snippet and that namespace are
    built together. Another reason to [avoid deeply nested
    namespaces](http://abseil.io/tips/130)). The lack of namespace qualification
    is important here: this snippet may have compiled if the using-directives
    were fully-qualified *and* if there were no unqualified lookups on names
    common to both namespaces.
*   A newly-introduced symbol in `::totw::example`, `::totw`, `::testing`,
    `::rpc`, or the global namespace could collide with an existing symbol in
    _any of those namespaces_. That's a big matrix of possibilities.

## Why Do We Have This Feature, Then?

There are legitimate uses of using-directives within generic libraries (relating
to ADL, naturally), but they are so obscure and rare that they don't deserve a
mention here or in the style guide.

## Parting Words

Using-directives are time-bombs: code that compiles today could easily stop
compiling with the next language version or symbol addition. For external code
that is short-lived and whose dependencies never change, this may be an
acceptable risk. But beware: if you later decide that you want your short-lived
project to continue working _over time_, those time-bombs may explode.
                                                                                
