---
title: "Tip of the Week #120: Return Values are Untouchable"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/120
type: markdown
order: "120"
---

Originally posted as TotW #120 on August 16, 2012

*by Samuel Benzaquen, [(sbenza@google.com)](mailto:sbenza@gmail.com)*

Let's suppose you have this code snippet, which seems to be working as expected:

```c++
absl::Status DoSomething() {
  absl::Status status;
  auto log_on_error = absl::MakeCleanup([&status] {
    if (!status.ok()) LOG(ERROR) << status;
  });
  status = DoA();
  if (!status.ok()) return status;
  status = DoB();
  if (!status.ok()) return status;
  status = DoC();
  if (!status.ok()) return status;
  return status;
}
```

A refactor changes the last line from `return status;` to `return
absl::OkStatus();` and suddenly the code stopped logging the errors.

What is going on?

## Summary

Never access (read or write) the return variable after the return statement has
run. Unless you take great care to do it correctly, the behavior is unspecified.

Return variables are implicitly accessed by destructors after they have been
copied or moved ([stmt.return]), which is how this unexpected access occurs, but
the copy/move may be elided, which is why behavior is unspecified.

This tip only applies when you are returning a non-reference local variable.
Returning any other expression will not trigger this problem.

## The Problem

There are 2 different optimizations on return statements that can modify the
behavior of that code snippet: the named return value optimization (NRVO) and
implicit moves.

The *before* code was working because NRVO is being performed and the `return`
statement is not actually doing any work. The variable `status` is already
constructed in the return address and the cleanup object is seeing this unique
instance of the `Status` object _after_ the return statement.

In the *after* code, NRVO is not being performed and the returned variable is
being moved into the return value. The cleanup object is being run after the
move operation is done and it is seeing a moved-from `Status`.

Note that the *before* code was not correct either, as it relies on NRVO for
correctness. We encourage you to rely on NRVO for performance (See TotW #24),
but not correctness. After all, NRVO is an _optional_ optimization and compiler
options or quality of implementation of the compiler can affect whether or not
it happens.

## Solution

Do not touch the return variable after the return statement. Be careful of
destructors of local variables doing so implicitly.

The simplest solution is to separate the function in two. One that does all the
processing, and one that calls the first one and does the post-processing (ie
logging on error). Eg:

```c++
absl::Status DoSomething() {
  absl::Status status;
  status = DoA();
  if (!status.ok()) return status;
  status = DoB();
  if (!status.ok()) return status;
  status = DoC();
  if (!status.ok()) return status;
  return status;
}

absl::Status DoSomethingAndLog() {
  absl::Status status = DoSomething();
  if (!status.ok()) LOG(ERROR) << status;
  return status;
}
```

If you are only reading the value, you could also make sure to disable the
optimizations instead. That would force a copy to be made all the time and the
post-processing will not see a moved-from value. Eg:

```c++
absl::Status DoSomething() {
  absl::Status status_no_nrvo;
  // 'status' is a reference so NRVO and all associated optimizations
  // will be disabled.
  // The 'return status;' statements will always copy the object and Logger
  // will always see the correct value.
  absl::Status& status = status_no_nrvo;
  auto log_on_error = absl::MakeCleanup([&status] {
    if (!status.ok()) LOG(ERROR) << status;
  });
  status = DoA();
  if (!status.ok()) return status;
  status = DoB();
  if (!status.ok()) return status;
  status = DoC();
  if (!status.ok()) return status;
  return status;
}
```

## Another Real Life Example

```c++
std::string EncodeVarInt(int i) {
  std::string out;
  proto2::io::StringOutputStream string_output(&out);
  proto2::io::CodedOutputStream coded_output(&string_output);
  coded_output.WriteVarint32(i);
  return out;
}
```

`CodedOutputStream` does some work on the destructor to trim unused trailing
bytes. This function can leave garbage bytes on the string if NRVO does not
happen.

Note that in this case you can't force NRVO to happen and the trick to disable
it won't help. We must modify the return value before the return statement runs.

A good solution is to add a block and restrict the function to only return after
the block is finished. Like this:

```c++
std::string EncodeVarInt(int i) {
  std::string out;
  {
    proto2::io::StringOutputStream string_output(&out);
    proto2::io::CodedOutputStream coded_output(&string_output);
    coded_output.WriteVarint32(i);
  }
  // At this point the streams are destroyed and they already flushed.
  // We can safely return 'out'.
  return out;
}
```

## Conclusion

Don't hold on to references to variables that are being returned.

You can't control whether NRVO happens or not. Compiler versions and options can
change this from underneath you. Do not depend on it for correctness.

You can't control whether returning a local variable triggers an implicit move
or not. The type you use might be updated in the future to support move
operations. Moreover, future language standards will apply implicit moves on
even more situations so you can't assume that just because it is not happening
now it won't happen in the future.
