---
title: "Tip of the Week #61: Default Member Initializers"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/61
type: markdown
order: "061"
---

Originally posted as Totw #61 on Nov 12, 2013

*by Michael Chastain [(mec.desktop@gmail.com)](mailto:mec.desktop@gmail.com)*

Updated October, 2016

## Declaring Default Member Initialization

A default member initializer declares a default value for a member upon
construction and looks like this:

```c++
class Client {
 private:
  int chunks_in_flight_ = 0;
};
```

This default initializer propagates into all constructors for that class, even
constructors that C++ synthesizes. Initializing members in this way is useful
for classes with lots of data members, especially for types such as `bool`,
`int`, `double`, and raw pointers. Non-static data members of these fundamental
types often slip through the cracks and end up uninitialized. Non-static data
members of any type may have initializers, though.

Default member initializers are also useful for declarations of simple structs
with no user-written constructor:

```c++
struct Options {
  bool use_loas = true;
  bool log_pii = false;
  int timeout_ms = 60 * 1000;
  std::array<int, 4> timeout_backoff_ms = { 10, 100, 1000, 10 * 1000 };
};
```

## Member Initialization Overrides

If a class constructor initializes a data member that already has a default
initializer, the initializer in the constructor supersedes the default:

```c++
class Frobber {
 public:
  Frobber() : ptr_(nullptr), length_(0) { }
  Frobber(const char* ptr, size_t length)
    : ptr_(ptr), length_(length) { }
  Frobber(const char* ptr) : ptr_(ptr) { }
 private:
  const char* ptr_;
  // length_ has a non-static class member initializer
  const size_t length_ = strlen(ptr_);
}
```

This code is equivalent to the older code:

```c++
class Frobber {
 public:
  Frobber() : ptr_(nullptr), length_(0) { }
  Frobber(const char* ptr, size_t length)
    : ptr_(ptr), length_(length) { }
  Frobber(const char* ptr)
    : ptr_(ptr), length_(strlen(ptr_)) { }
 private:
  const char* ptr_;
  const size_t length_;
}
```

Note that the first and second `Frobber` constructors have initializers for
their non-static variables; these two constructors will not use the default
initializer for `length_`. The third `Frobber` constructor, however, does
not have an initializer for `length_` so this constructor will use the default
initializer for `length_`.

As always in C++, all non-static variables are initialized in the order of their
declaration.

In the first 2 of the 3 `Frobber` constructors, the constructor provides an
initializer for `length_`. The constructor initializer supersedes the default
member initializer -- the non-static class member initializer does not
contribute to code generation for these constructors.

Note: Older documentation may refer to default member initializers as non-static
data member initializers, abbreviated to NSDMIs.

## Conclusion

Default member initializers won’t make your program any faster. They will help
reduce bugs from omissions, especially when someone adds a new constructor or a
new data member.

Be careful not to confuse a non-static class member initializer with a static
class member initializer:

```c++
class Alpha {
 private:
  static int counter_ = 0;
};
```

This is an older feature. `counter_` is static and this is a static declaration
with an initializer. This is different from a non-static class member
initializer, just as static member variables are different from non-static
member variables.
