---
title: "Tip of the Week #141: Beware Implicit Conversions to <code>bool</code>"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/141
type: markdown
order: "141"
---

Originally posted as TotW #141 on January 19, 2018

*By [Samuel Freilich](mailto:sfreilich@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/141](https://abseil.io/tips/141)


## Two Kinds of Null Pointer Checks

Checking a pointer for null before dereferencing is important to avoid crashes
and bugs. This can be done in two ways:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
if (foo) {
  DoSomething(*foo);
}
</pre>

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
if (foo != nullptr) {
  DoSomething(*foo);
}
</pre>

Both of these conditionals have the same semantics given that `foo` is a
pointer, but the type-checking on the latter is a little tighter. Many types in
C++ can be implicitly converted to `bool`, and additional caution is required
when the pointed-to type can itself be converted to `bool`.

Consider the following code which could have two very different meanings:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
bool* is_migrated = ...;

// Is this checking that `is_migrated` is not null, or was the actual
// intent to verify that `*is_migrated` is true?
if (is_migrated) {
  ...
}
</pre>

This code is clearer:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// Looks like a null-pointer check for a bool*
if (is_migrated != nullptr) {
  ...
}
</pre>

Both styles are acceptable in Google C++ code. So when the underlying type is
not implicitly convertible to `bool`, follow the style of surrounding code. If
the value in question is a "smart pointer" like `std::unique_ptr`, the semantics
and tradeoffs are the same.

## Optional Values and Scoped Assignments

What about optional (e.g. `absl::optional`) values? They deserve more careful
consideration.

For example:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
absl::optional&lt;bool&gt; b = MaybeBool();
if (b) { ... }  // What happens when the function returns absl::optional(false)?
</pre>

Putting the variable declaration in the conditional of the `if` statement
[limits the scope](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Local_Variables)
of the variable, but the value is implicitly[^1] converted to a `bool`, so it
may not be explicit which boolean property is tested.

The intent of the following code is clearer:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
absl::optional&lt;bool&gt; b = MaybeBool();
if (b.has_value()) { ... }
</pre>

Note that, in fact, the code snippets above are equivalent: `absl::optional`'s
conversion to `bool` only looks at whether the `optional` is full, not at its
contents. A reader may find it counterintuitive that `optional(false)` is
`true`, but it's immediately clear that `optional(false)` has a value. Again,
it's worth extra caution when the underlying type is implicitly convertible to
`bool`.

One pattern for optional return values is to put a variable declaration in the
conditional of the `if` statement. This
[limits the scope](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html/#Local_Variables)
of the variable, but involves an implicit conversion to `bool`:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
if (absl::optional&lt;Foo&gt; foo = MaybeFoo()) {
  DoSomething(*foo);
}
</pre>

**Note:** In C++17, `if` statements can contain an initializer, so the scope of
the declaration can be limited while avoiding the implicit conversion:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
if (absl::optional&lt;Foo&gt; foo = MaybeFoo(); foo.has_value()) {
  DoSomething(*foo);
}
</pre>

## "Boolean-like" Enums

Let's say you've taken the advice of [Tip #94](/tips/94) and decided to use an
`enum` in your function signature instead of a `bool` for better readability at
the call sites. This kind of refactoring might introduce an implicit conversion
in the function definition:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
void ParseCommandLineFlags(
    const char* usage, int* argc, char*** argv,
    StripFlagsMode strip_flags_mode) {
  if (strip_flags_mode) {  // Wait, which value was true again?
    ...
  }
}
</pre>

You can gain additional clarity by replacing the implicit conversion with an
explicit comparison:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void ParseCommandLineFlags(
    const char* usage, int* argc, char*** argv,
    StripFlagsMode strip_flags_mode) {
  if (strip_flags_mode == kPreserveFlags) {
    ...
  }
}
</pre>

## Summary

In summary, be aware that implicit conversions to `bool` can be unclear, so
consider writing more explicit code:

*   Compare pointer types to `nullptr` (especially if the pointed-at type is
    implicitly convertible to `bool`).
*   Test container emptiness with boolean functions like
    `absl::optional<T>::has_value()` (especially if the contained type is
    implicitly convertible to `bool`). Use the optional initializer form for
    `if` to limit the scope of variables ([Tip #165](/tips/165)). Remember
    call-only interfaces though, and don't take the address of `value()` or
    `has_value()`. The `testing::Optional` matcher can help in tests.
*   Compare enums to specific values.

[^1]: More specifically, it's a
    ["contextual conversion"](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/implicit_conversion#Contextual_conversions).
