---
title: "Tip of the Week #134: <code>make_unique</code> and <code>private</code> Constructors."
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/134
type: markdown
order: "134"
---

Originally posted as TotW #134 on May 10, 2017

*By Yitzhak Mandelbaum, Google Engineer*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/134](https://abseil.io/tips/134)


So, you read [Tip #126](/tips/126) and are ready to leave `new` behind.
Everything's going fine until you try to use `absl::make_unique` to construct an
object with a private constructor, and it fails to compile. Let's take a look at
a concrete example of this problem to understand what went wrong. Then, we can
discuss some solutions.

## Example: Manufacturing Widgets

You're defining a class to represent widgets. Each widget has an identifier and
those identifiers are subject to certain constraints. To ensure those
constraints are always met, you declare the constructor of the `Widget` class
private and provide users with a factory function, `Make`, for generating
widgets with proper identifiers. (See [Tip #42](/tips/42) for advice on why
factory functions are preferable to initializer methods.)

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
class Widget {
 public:
  static std::unique_ptr&lt;Widget&gt; Make() {
    return absl::make_unique&lt;Widget&gt;(GenerateId());
  }

 private:
  Widget(int id) : id_(id) {}
  static int GenerateId();

  int id_;
}
</pre>

When you try to compile, you get an error like this:

<pre class="prettyprint code">
error: calling a private constructor of class 'Widget'
    { return unique_ptr&lt;_Tp&gt;(new _Tp(std::forward&lt;_Args&gt;(__args)...)); }
                                 ^
note: in instantiation of function template specialization
'absl::make_unique&lt;Widget, int&gt;' requested here
    return absl::make_unique&lt;Widget&gt;(GenerateId());
                ^
note: declared private here
  Widget(int id) : id_(id) {}
  ^
</pre>

While `Make` has access to the private constructor, `absl::make_unique` does
not! Note that this issue can also arise with friends. For example, a friend of
`Widget` would have the same problem using `absl::make_unique` to construct a
`Widget`.

## Recommendations

We recommend either of these alternatives:

*   Use `new` and `absl::WrapUnique`, but explain your choice. For example,

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
    // Using `new` to access a non-public constructor.
    return absl::WrapUnique(new Widget(...));
</pre>

*   Consider whether the constructor may be safely exposed publicly. If so, make
    it public and document when direct construction is appropriate.

In many cases, marking a constructor private is over-engineering. In those
cases, the best solution is to mark your constructors public and document their
proper use. However, if your constructor needs to be private (say, to ensure
class invariants), then use `new` and `WrapUnique`.

## Why Can't I Just Friend <code>absl::make_unique</code>?

You might be tempted to friend `absl::make_unique`, which would give it access
to your private constructors. *This is a bad idea*, for a few reasons.

First, while a full discussion of friending practices is beyond the scope of
this tip, a good rule of thumb is "no long-distance friendships". Otherwise,
you're creating a competing declaration of the friend, one not maintained by the
owner. See also the
[style guide's advice](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Friends).

Second, notice that you are depending on an implementation detail of
`absl::make_unique`, namely that it directly calls `new`. If it is refactored so
that it indirectly calls `new` -- for example, in build modes using C++14 and
later absl::make_unique is an alias for std::make_unique, and the friend
declaration is useless.

Finally, by friending `absl::make_unique`, you've allowed *anyone* to create
your objects that way, so why not just declare your constructors public and
avoid the problem altogether?

## What About <code>std::shared_ptr</code>?

The situation is somewhat different in the case of `std::shared_ptr`. There is
no `absl::WrapShared` and the analog -- `std::shared_ptr<T>(new T(...))` --
involves two allocations, where `std::make_shared` can be done with one. If this
difference is important, then consider the *passkey idiom*: have the constructor
take a special token that only certain code can create. For example,

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class Widget {
  class Token {
   private:
    Token() {}
    friend Widget;
  };

 public:
  static std::shared_ptr&lt;Widget&gt; Make() {
    return std::make_shared&lt;Widget&gt;(Token{}, GenerateId());
  }

  Widget(Token, int id) : id_(id) {}

 private:
  static int GenerateId();

  int id_;
};
</pre>

For a full discussion of the passkey idiom, consult either of these articles:

*   [Passkey Idiom: More Useful Empty Classes][1]
*   [Passkey Idiom and Better Friendship in C++][2]

[1]: https://arne-mertz.de/2016/10/passkey-idiom/
[2]: http://www.spiria.com/en/blog/desktop-software/passkey-idiom-and-better-friendship-c
