---
title: "Tip of the Week #143: C++11 deleted functions (`= delete`)"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/143
type: markdown
order: "143"
---

Originally posted as TotW #143 on March 2, 2018

*by Leonard Mosescu, [(mosescu@google.com)](mailto:mosescu@google.com)*

### Introduction

Interfaces, in a general sense, normally define the set of operations which can
be invoked. Yet sometimes we may want to express the opposite: explicitly define
a set of operations which should *not* be used. For example, disabling the copy
constructor and copy assignment operator is a common way to restrict copy
semantics for a particular type.

The language offers multiple options to effect such restrictions (and we'll
explore each one shortly):

1.  Provide a dummy definition consisting solely of a _runtime_ check.
2.  Use accessibility controls (protected/private) to make the function
    inaccessible.
3.  Declare the function, but intentionally omit the definition.
4.  Since C++11: Explicitly define the function as "deleted".

The pre-C++11 techniques range from runtime checks (#1) to compile-time (#2) or
link time (#3) diagnostics. While battle-proven, these techniques are far from
perfect: a runtime check is not ideal for the majority of situations where
the constraint is static, since a link-time check delays the diagnostic to very
late in the build process. Moreover, link time diagnostics are not
guaranteed (missing a definition for an ODR-used function is an ODR violation)
and the actual diagnostic messages are rarely developer-friendly.

A compile time check is better, but still flawed. It only works for member
functions and is based on accessibility constraints, which are verbose,
error-prone and susceptible to loopholes. Moreover, the errors that result from
referencing such functions can be misleading, referring as they do to access
restrictions rather than interface misuse.

The application of #2 and #3 to disable copying would look like this:

```c++
class MyType {
 private:
  MyType(const MyType&);  // Not defined anywhere.
  MyType& operator=(const MyType&);  // Not defined anywhere.
  // ...
};
```

Manually applying this for every class gets old really fast, so developers
commonly package them in one of these ways:

**The "mixin" approach** ([boost::noncopyable][6], [non-copyable mixin][7])

```c++
class MyType : private NoCopySemantics {
  ...
};
```

**The macros approach**

```c++
class MyType {
 private:
  DISALLOW_COPY_AND_ASSIGN(MyType);
};
```

### C++11 Deleted Definitions

C++11 addressed the need for a better solution through a new language feature:
deleted definitions \[_dcl.fct.def.delete_\]. (See "deleted definitions" in the
[C++ standard draft][0].) Any function can be explicitly _defined as deleted:_

```c++
void foo() = delete;
```

The syntax is straightforward, resembling defaulted functions (see
[TotW #134][2]), although with a couple of notable differences:

1.  Any function can be deleted, including non-member functions (in contrast to
    `=default`, which works only with special member functions).
2.  Functions must be deleted on the first declaration only (unlike `=default`).

The key thing to keep in mind is that `=delete` is a function _definition_ (it
does not remove or hide the declaration). The deleted function is thus defined
and participates in name lookup and overload resolution as any other function.
It's a special kind of _"radioactive"_ definition which says _"don't touch!"_.

Attempts to use a deleted function result is a _compile time_ error with a clear
diagnostic, which is one of the key benefits over the pre-C++11 techniques.

```c++
// Good code
class MyType {
 public:
  // Disable default constructor.
  MyType() = delete;

  // Disable copy (and move) semantics.
  MyType(const MyType&) = delete;
  MyType& operator=(const MyType&) = delete;

  //...
};
```

```c++
// error: call to deleted constructor of 'MyType'
// note: 'MyType' has been explicitly marked deleted here
//   MyType() = delete;
MyType x;

void foo(const MyType& val) {
  // error: call to deleted constructor of 'MyType'
  // note: 'MyType' has been explicitly marked deleted here
  //   MyType(const MyType&) = delete;
  MyType copy = val;
}
```

**Note**: by explicitly defining the copy operations as deleted we also suppress
the move operations (having user-declared copy operations inhibits the implicit
declaration of the move operations). If the intention is to define a move-only
type using the implicit move operations, `=default` can be used to "bring
them back", for example:

```c++
// Good code
MyType(MyType&&) = default;
MyType& operator=(MyType&&) = default;
```

### Other Uses

While the examples above are centered on copy semantics (which is likely the
most common case), any function (member or not) can be deleted.

Since deleted functions participate in overload resolution they can help catch
unintended uses. Let's say we have the following overloaded `print` function:

```c++
void print(int value);
void print(absl::string_view str);
```

Calling `print('x')` will print the integer value of 'x', when the developer
likely intended `print("x")`. We can catch this:

```c++
void print(int value);
void print(const char* str);
// Use string literals ":" instead of character literals ':'.
void print(char) = delete;
```

Note that `=delete` doesn't affect just function calls. Attempting to take the
address of a deleted function will also result in a compilation error:

```c++
void (*pfn1)(int) = &print;  // ok
void (*pfn2)(char) = &print; // error: attempt to use a deleted function
```

This example is extracted from a real world application: [absl::StrCat()][8].
Deleted functions are valuable any time a particular part of an interface must
be restricted.

Defining destructors as deleted is stricter than making them private (although
this is a big hammer and it may introduce more limitations than intended)

```c++
// A _very_ limited type:
//   1. Dynamic storage only.
//   2. Lives forever (can't be destructed).
//   3. Can't be a member or base class.
class ImmortalHeap {
 public:
  ~ImmortalHeap() = delete;
  //...
};
```

Yet another example, this time we want to only allow the allocation of non-array
objects:

```c++
// Don't allow new T[].
class NoHeapArraysPlease {
 public:
  void* operator new[](std::size_t) = delete;
  void operator delete[](void*) = delete;
};

auto p = new NoHeapArraysPlease;      // OK

// error: call to deleted function 'operator new[]'
// note: candidate function has been explicitly deleted
//   void* operator new[](std::size_t) = delete;
auto pa = new NoHeapArraysPlease[10];
```

### Summary

`=delete` offers an explicit way to express parts of an interface which should
not be referenced, also enabling better diagnostics than the pre-C++11 idioms.
No piece of code, including compiler generated code, can reference a deleted
function. For nuanced access control, the access specifiers or more elaborate
techniques (for example, the passkey idiom as discussed in [Tip #134][2]) are
more appropriate.

**Important**: Since the deleted definitions are part of the interface they
should have the same access specifier as the other parts of the interface.
Concretely, this means they should usually be public. In practice this also
results in the best diagnostics (private and =delete doesn't make much sense).

**Credits**: This tip includes key contributions and feedback from many people,
special thanks to: Mark Mentovai, James Dennett, Bruce Dawson and Yitzhak
Mandelbaum.

### References

*   [TotW #131: Special member functions and =default][1]
*   [TotW #134: make_unique and private constructors][2]
*   [deleted functions][3]
*   [access specifiers][4]
*   [C++ Core Guidelines: C.81][5]

[0]: http://eel.is/c++draft/dcl.fct.def.delete
[1]: https://abseil.io/tips/131
[2]: https://abseil.io/tips/134
[3]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/function#Deleted_functions
[4]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/access
[5]: https://github.com/isocpp/CppCoreGuidelines/blob/master/CppCoreGuidelines.md#c81-use-delete-when-you-want-to-disable-default-behavior-without-wanting-an-alternative
[6]: http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/master/libs/core/doc/html/core/noncopyable.html
[7]: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/More_C%2B%2B_Idioms/Non-copyable_Mixin
[8]: https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/5337d2d0e312ce6bce0140b5f1da5548a0b3fed5/absl/strings/str_cat.h#L235