---
title: "Tip of the Week #11: Return Policy"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: false
permalink: tips/11
type: markdown
order: "011"
---

Originally posted as TotW #11 on August 16, 2012

*by Paul Chisholm , [(psrchisholm@gmail.com)](mailto:psrchisholm@gmail.com)*

Note: this tip, though still relevant, preceded the introduction of move
semantics in C++11. Please read this tip with the advice from
[TotW #77](/tips/77) also in mind.

*Frodo: There'll be none left for the return journey.* *Sam: I don't think there
will be a return journey, Mr. Frodo.* -- The Lord of the Rings: The Return of
the King (novel by J.R.R. Tolkien, screenplay by Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, &
Peter Jackson)

Many older C++ codebases show patterns that are somewhat fearful of copying
objects. Happily, we can "copy" without copying, thanks to something called
["return value optimization"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Return_value_optimization)
(RVO).

RVO is a long-standing, little-known feature of almost all C++ compilers.
Consider the following C++98 code, which has a copy constructor and an assignment
operator. These functions are so expensive, the developer had them print a
message every time they’re used:

```c++
class SomeBigObject {
 public:
  SomeBigObject() { ... }
  SomeBigObject(const SomeBigObject& s) {
    printf("Expensive copy …\n", …);
    …
  }
  SomeBigObject& operator=(const SomeBigObject& s) {
    printf("Expensive assignment …\n", …);
    …
    return *this;
  }
  ~SomeBigObject() { ... }
  …
};
```

(Note that we're intentionally avoiding discussion of move operations here.
See [TotW #77](/tips/77) for more information.)

Would you recoil in horror if this class had a factory method such as the
following?

```c++
static SomeBigObject SomeBigObjectFactory(...) {
  SomeBigObject local;
  ...
  return local;
}
```

Looks inefficient, doesn’t it? What happens if we run the following?

```c++
SomeBigObject obj = SomeBigObject::SomeBigObjectFactory(...);
```

Simple answer: You probably expect there to be at least two objects created:
the object returned from the called function, and the object in the calling
function. Both are copies, so the program prints two messages about expensive
operations. Real-world answer: No message is printed -- because the copy
constructor and assignment operator were never called!

How’d that happen? A lot of C++ programmers write "efficient code" that creates
an object and passes that object’s address to a function, which uses that
pointer to operate on the original object. Well, under the circumstances
described below, the compiler can transform such "an inefficient copy" into that
"efficient code"!

When the compiler sees a variable in the calling function (that will be
constructed from the return value), and a variable in the called function (that
will be returned), it realizes it doesn’t need both variables. Under the covers,
the compiler passes the address of the calling function’s variable to the called
function.

To quote the C++98 standard, "Whenever a temporary class object is copied using
a copy constructor ... an implementation is permitted to treat the original and
the copy as two different ways of referring to the same object and not perform a
copy at all, even if the class copy constructor or destructor have side effects.
For a function with a class return type, if the expression in the return
statement is the name of a local object ... an implementation is permitted to omit
creating the temporary object to hold the function return value ..." (Section 12.8
\[class.copy\], paragraph 15 of the C++98 standard. The C++11 standard has similar
language in section 12.8, paragraph 31, but it’s more complicated.)

Worried that "permitted" isn’t a very strong promise? Fortunately, all modern C++
compilers perform RVO by default, even in debug builds, even for non-inlined
functions. (`--cxxopt=-fno-elide-constructors` will turn off RVO.)

## How Can You Ensure the Compiler Performs RVO?

The called function should define a single variable for the return value:

```c++
SomeBigObject SomeBigObject::SomeBigObjectFactory(...) {
  SomeBigObject local;
  …
  return local;
}
```

The calling function should assign the returned value to a new variable:

```c++
// No message about expensive operations:
SomeBigObject obj = SomeBigObject::SomeBigObjectFactory(...);
```

That’s it!

The compiler can’t do RVO if the calling function reuses an existing variable to
store the return value (though move semantics would apply for move-enabled types
in this case):

```c++
// RVO won’t happen here; prints message "Expensive assignment ...":
obj = SomeBigObject::SomeBigObjectFactory(s2);
```

The compiler also can’t do RVO if the called function uses more than one
variable for the return value:

```c++
// RVO won’t happen here:
static SomeBigObject NonRvoFactory(...) {
  SomeBigObject object1, object2;
  object1.DoSomethingWith(...);
  object2.DoSomethingWith(...);
  if (flag) {
    return object1;
  } else {
    return object2;
  }
}
```

But it’s okay if the called function uses one variable and returns it in
multiple places:

```c++
// RVO will happen here:
SomeBigObject local;
if (...) {
  local.DoSomethingWith(...);
  return local;
} else {
  local.DoSomethingWith(...);
  return local;
}
```

That’s probably all you **need** to know about RVO.

## One More Thing: Temporaries

RVO works with temporary objects, not just named variables. You
can benefit from RVO when the called function returns a temporary object:

```c++
// RVO works here:
SomeBigObject SomeBigObject::ReturnsTempFactory(...) {
  return SomeBigObject::SomeBigObjectFactory(...);
}
```

You can also benefit from RVO when the calling function immediately uses the
returned value (which is stored in a temporary object):

```c++
// No message about expensive operations:
EXPECT_EQ(SomeBigObject::SomeBigObjectFactory(...).Name(), s);
```

A final note: If your code needs to make copies, then make copies, whether or
not the copies can be optimized away. Don’t trade correctness for efficiency.
