---
title: "Tip of the Week #152: <code>AbslHashValue</code> and You"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/152
type: markdown
order: "152"
---

Originally posted as TotW #152 on June 21, 2018

*By [Matt Kulukundis](mailto:kfm@google.com)*

**I love Mozart, but I often make a terrible hash of it.** -- *Simon Rattle*

The [`absl::Hash` framework][absl-hash] is now the default hash implementation
for the [Swisstable family of hash tables][swisstables]
(`absl::{flat,node}_hash_{set,map}`). All types hashable by this framework will
automatically be useable as keys in Swisstables.

## How Do I Use It?

Let's say we have a simple `Song` struct (let's agree that a song can be
uniquely identified by these fields):

```cpp
struct Song {
  std::string name;
  std::string artist;
  absl::Duration duration;
};
```

and we want to be able to store an `absl::flat_hash_set<Song>` or an
`absl::flat_hash_map<Song, CopyrightOwner>`. All we have to do is add a simple
friend function like:

```
struct Song {
  std::string name;
  std::string artist;
  absl::Duration duration;

  template <typename H>
  friend H AbslHashValue(H h, const Song& s) {
    return H::combine(std::move(h), s.name, s.artist, s.duration);
  }

  // operator == and != omitted for brevity.
};
```

and everything will work!

## How Do I Test It?

We provide `absl::VerifyTypeImplementsAbslHashCorrectly` to verify that a type
implements its overload correctly. This function has a few requirements:

*   The type must implement the `==` operator correctly.
*   The caller must provide instances of the type that include any interesting
    representations for their type. (For example, a type with a small size
    optimization should include equivalent instances that use the small size
    optimization and that do not.)

```cpp
TEST(MyType, SupportsAbslHash) {
  EXPECT_TRUE(absl::VerifyTypeImplementsAbslHashCorrectly({
      MyType(),
      MyType(1, 2),
      MyType(2, 3),
      MyType(0, 0),
  }));
}
```

`absl::VerifyTypeImplementsAbslHashCorrectly` also supports testing heterogenous
lookup and custom equality operators.

Intrigued and want to know more? Read the [absl::Hash docs][absl-hash].

[absl-hash]: /docs/cpp/guides/hash
[swisstables]: /docs/cpp/guides/container

