---
title: "Tip of the Week #146: Default vs Value Initialization"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/146
type: markdown
order: "146"
---

Originally posted as TotW #146 on April 19, 2018

*By [Dominic Hamon](mailto:dominic@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/146](https://abseil.io/tips/146)


“The road to success is always under construction.” --
[Lily Tomlin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lily_Tomlin)

## TL;DR

For safety and readability, you should assume scalar objects are not initialized
to a reasonable value until they have been explicitly set to a value. Use of
initializers can ensure that scalar values are initialized to safe values.

## Introduction

When objects are created, they may be initialized or uninitialized.
Uninitialized objects are not safe to read, but understanding when the object is
uninitialized is not trivial.

The first thing to understand is if the type under construction is scalar,
aggregate, or some other type. A *scalar* type can be thought of as a simple
type: an integral or floating point arithmetic object; a pointer; an enum; a
pointer-to-member; `nullptr_t`. An *aggregate* type is an array or trivial class
(one with only public, non-static data members, no user-provided constructors,
no base classes, no virtual member functions, and no default member
initializers).

Another factor affecting whether an instance has been initialized to a value
that is safe to read is whether it has an explicit *initializer*. That is, the
object name in the statement is followed by `()`, `{}`, or `= {}`.

As these rules are not intuitive, the easiest rule to remember to ensure an
object is initialized is to provide an initializer. This is called
*value-initialization* and is distinct from *default-initialization*, which is
what the compiler will perform otherwise for scalar and aggregate types.

## User-Provided Constructors

If a type is defined with a user-defined constructor, it is not an aggregate
type, and initialization gets much simpler with both value- and
default-initialization invoking the constructor:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct Foo {
  Foo() : v() {}

  int v;
  std::string s;
};

int main() {
  Foo default_foo;
  Foo value_foo = {};
  ...
}
</pre>

The `= {}` triggers value-initialization of `value_foo`, which calls `Foo`'s
default constructor. After, `v` is safe to read, because the constructor's
initializer list value-initializes it. In fact, as `v` does not have a class
type, this is a special case of value-initialization called
*zero-initialization* and `value_foo.v` will have the value `0`.

Similarly, while `default_foo` is default-initialized, it calls the same
constructor, so `default_foo.v` is also zero-initialized and is safe to read.

Note that `Foo::s` has a user-provided constructor, so it is value-initialized
in either case, and safe to read.

### Uninitialized Members in User-Provided Constructors

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct Foo {
  Foo() {}

  int v;
};

int main() {
  Foo foo = {};
}
</pre>

In this case, although `Foo` has a user-provided constructor, it fails to
initialize `v`. In this case, `v` is once more default-initialized, which means
its value is undetermined, and it is unsafe to read.

### Explicit Value-Initialization

In general, it is a good idea to replace the initializer with an explicit
initialization to a value, even if that value is 0, for the benefit of the
reader. This is called *direct-initialization*, which is a more specific form of
value-initialization.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct Foo {
  Foo() : v(0) {}

  int v;
};
</pre>

## Default Member Initialization

A simpler solution than defining constructors for classes, while still avoiding
the pitfalls of default- vs value-initialization, is to initialize members of
classes at declaration, wherever possible:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct Foo {
  int v = 0;
};
</pre>

This ensures that no matter how the instance of `Foo` is constructed, `v` will
be initialized to a determinate value.

*Default member initialization* also serves as documentation, especially in the
case of booleans, or non-zero initial values, as to what is a safe initial value
for the member.

## Pro Tip: Scalar Zero-Initialization

The full set of rules for when scalar values are safe to read after
initialization:

*   The type is followed by an explicit `()`, `{}`, or `= {}` initializer.
*   The instance of the type under construction is an element of an array with
    an initializer as above. E.g., `new int[10]()`.
*   The instance of the type under construction is a member of a class with a
    disabled default constructor, and the instance of the outer object is
    value-initialized.
*   The instance of the type under construction is static or thread-local.
*   The instance of the type under construction is a member of a class with an
    aggregate type that has an initializer.

### Array Types

It's easy to forget to add an explicit initializer to array declarations, but
this can lead to particularly pernicious initialization issues.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
int main() {
  int foo[3];
  int bar[3] = {};
  ...
}
</pre>

Every element of `foo` is default-initialized, while every element of `bar` will
be zero-initialized.

## A Digression Discerning Defaulted Default Constructor Declarations

Pop quiz: Do these stylistically different declarations affect the behaviour of
the code?

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct Foo {
  Foo() = default;

  int v;
};

struct Bar {
  Bar();

  int v;
};

Bar::Bar() = default;

int main() {
  Foo f = {};
  Bar b = {};
  ...
}
</pre>

Many developers would reasonably assume that this may affect code generation
quality, but otherwise is a style preference. As you might have guessed, because
I'm asking, this is not the case.

The reason goes back to the first section above on User-provided Constructors.
As the constructor for `Foo` is defaulted on declaration, it is not
user-provided. This means that `Foo` is an aggregate type, and `f.v` is
zero-initialized. However, `Bar` has a user-provided constructor, albeit created
by the compiler as a defaulted constructor. As this constructor does not
explicitly initialize `Bar::v`, `b.v` will be default-initialized and unsafe to
read.

## Recommendations

*   Be explicit about the value to which scalar types are being initialized
    instead of relying on zero-initialization.
*   Treat all instances of scalar types as having indeterminate values until you
    explicitly initialize or assign to them.
*   If a member has a sensible default, and the class has multiple constructors,
    use a default member initializer to ensure it isn't left uninitialized. Be
    aware that
    [a member initializer within a constructor will override the default](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/data_members).

## Further Reading

*   [Tip #61: Default Member Initializers](/tips/61: Default Member Initializers)
*   [Tip #88: Initialization: `=`, `(](/tips/88: Initialization:`=`,`())`, and``
*   [Tip #131: Special member functions and `=default`](/tips/131: Special member functions and `=default`)
*   [CppReference - Initialization](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/initialization)
