---
title: "Tip of the Week #182: Initialize Your Ints!"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/182
type: markdown
order: "182"
---

Originally posted as TotW #182 on July 23, 2020



Updated 2020-07-23

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/182](https://abseil.io/tips/182)


*"In any moment of decision, the best thing you can do is the right thing, the
next best thing is the wrong thing, and the worst thing you can do is nothing."
--Theodore Roosevelt*

C++ makes it too easy to leave variables uninitialized. This is scary, because
almost any access to an uninitialized object results in *Undefined Behavior*.
Default initialization *is* the default, among many forms, and occurs when no
initial value is specified for a variable, but it is not always
*initialization*.

## Default Initialization of Trivial Types

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
{
  bool bool_one;
  bool bool_two = bool_one;
}
</pre>

It surprises many to learn that the above code snippet invokes *Undefined
Behavior*. In the first statement, `bool_one` is *default initialized*, which
(ironically) is not guaranteed to actually initialize the variable. In the
example, `bool_one` is left uninitialized even though it uses "default
initialization". How do we know this?

To understand this phenomenon, let's first clarify when default initialization
does and does not behave in this way. In C++, not all types expose the ability
to skip initialization. There are two primary categories that are worth
highlighting.

1\) For types that have default constructors, including most `class` types,
default initialization will invoke the default constructor in all cases. For
example, `std::string str;` is guaranteed to initialize `str` as if it had been
*value initialized* as in `std::string str{};`.

2\) For types with no constructors, such as `bool`, default initialization can
exhibit one of two possible behaviors. A) If the variable being initialized is
`static` or defined at namespace scope, so-called "value initialization" will be
performed. B) However, for non-`static`, block-scope variables, default
initialization performs no initialization at all for these types, leaving the
variable uninitialized with an *indeterminate* value.

As a result, in the above example, `bool_one` is uninitialized because `bool`
has no constructors and `bool_one` is a non-`static`, block-scope variable. When
`bool_two`'s initialization reads the value of `bool_one`, the resulting
behavior is undefined.

Which types in C++ lack constructors?

C++ inherits types from C, referred to as *trivially default constructible* (or
colloquially "trivial") types, which are implemented with no constructors. This
includes fundamental types like `int` and `double` as well as `struct` types
that contain only trivial fields with no member-wise initializers. It also
includes all raw pointer types, even when they point to classes as in
`MyClass*`.

Said another way, since C does not have constructors, such types when used in
C++ retain that behavior for default initialization.

Why does C++ allow for uninitialized objects?

The ability to leave some objects uninitialized is needed on rare occasion for
performance or for providing placeholders where there is truly no initial value.
Since most access patterns of uninitialized values are undefined, sanitizers can
also use this information to find bugs.

## Default Initialization of Potentially-Trivial Types

Like the code snippet before, the following code also uses *default
initialization*:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
{
  MyType my_variable;
}
</pre>

Is it safe to read the value of `my_variable`?

To answer that question, we must know more about the implementation of `MyType`.
The callsite shown does not have enough information to determine whether reading
`my_variable` is safe. For example, if `MyType` is a simple `struct` type with
only `int` fields, no constructors and no member-wise initializers,
`my_variable` will be uninitialized. However, if `MyType` is a `class` type with
a user-defined implementation for `MyType::MyType()`, the constructor is
responsible for initializing the variable such that immediately reading its
value is a safe operation.

## Suggestion: Initialize Trivial Objects

In most code, you **probably** don't want uninitialized objects. Rarely, it can
make sense for reasons of performance or encoding semantics. However, unless in
one of these exceptional cases, prefer initializing trivial objects in `struct`
fields and variables as in the following examples:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
float ComputeValueWithDefault() {
  float value = 0.0;  // Guarantees initialization by providing a default value.
  ComputeValue(&value);
  return value;
}
</pre>

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct MySequence {
  // Member-wise initializers guarantee initialization.
  MyClass* first_element = nullptr;
  int element_count = 0;
};

MySequence GetPopulatedMySequence() {
  MySequence my_sequence;  // Made safe by the member-wise initializers.
  MaybePopulateMySequence(&my_sequence);
  return my_sequence;
}
</pre>

Additionally, where feasible, refrain from making type aliases for trivial
types. We want `struct` and `class` types to be safely initialized in all cases.
Since fundamental types (integers, pointers, etc.) do not guarantee
initialization from default initialization, giving names to such types that
appear to be safe can make code more difficult to reason about.

Examples of aliases for trivial types are shown below:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
{
  using KeyType = float;  // C++-style alias
  typedef bool ResultT;  // C-style alias

  // [Many lines of code...]

  // Surprise! These variables are uninitialized!
  KeyType some_key;
  ResultT some_result;
}
</pre>

## Additional Information

*   [CppReference: Default initialization](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/default_initialization)
*   [Tip of the Week #88: Initialization: =, (), and {}](/tips/88)
*   [Tip of the Week #146: Default vs Value Initialization](/tips/146)
