---
title: "Tip of the Week #166: When a Copy is not a Copy"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/166
type: markdown
order: "166"
---

Originally posted as TotW #166 on August 28, 2019

*By [Richard Smith](mailto:richardsmith@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/166](https://abseil.io/tips/166)


*Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem." ("Entities should not be
multiplied without necessity") -- William of Ockham*

*If you don't know where you're going, you're probably going wrong.” -- Terry
Pratchett*

## Overview

Starting in C++17, objects are created "in place" when possible.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class BigExpensiveThing {
 public:
  static BigExpensiveThing Make() {
    // ...
    return BigExpensiveThing();
  }
  // ...
 private:
  BigExpensiveThing();
  std::array&lt;OtherThing, 12345&gt; data_;
};

BigExpensiveThing MakeAThing() {
  return BigExpensiveThing::Make();
}

void UseTheThing() {
  BigExpensiveThing thing = MakeAThing();
  // ...
}
</pre>

How many times does this copy or move a `BigExpensiveThing`?

Prior to C++17, the answer was [up to](/tips/117) three: one for each `return`
statement, and one more when initializing `thing`. This makes some sense: each
function potentially puts the `BigExpensiveThing` in a different place, so a
move may be needed in order to put the value where the ultimate caller wants it.
In practice, however, the object was always constructed "in place" in the
variable `thing`, with no moves being performed, and the C++ language rules
permitted these move operations to be "elided" to facilitate this optimization.

In C++17, this code is guaranteed to perform zero copies or moves. In fact, the
above code is valid even if `BigExpensiveThing` is not moveable. The constructor
call in `BigExpensiveThing::Make` directly constructs the local variable `thing`
in `UseTheThing`.

So what's going on?

When the compiler sees an expression like `BigExpensiveThing()`, it does not
immediately create a temporary object. Instead, it treats that expression as
instructions for how to initialize some eventual object, but defers creating
(formally, "materializing") a temporary object for as long as possible.

Generally, creation of an object is deferred until the object is given a name.
The named object (`thing` in the above example) is directly initialized using
the instructions found by evaluating the initializer. If the name is a
reference, a temporary object will be materialized to hold the value.

As a consequence, objects are constructed directly in the right place, instead
of being constructed somewhere else and then copied. This behavior is sometimes
referred to as "guaranteed copy elision", but that's inaccurate: there was never
a copy in the first place.

All you need to know is: objects are not copied until after they are first given
a name. There is no extra cost in returning by value.

(Even after being given a name, local variables might still not be copied when
returned from a function, due to the Named Return Value Optimization. See
[Tip 11](/tips/11) for details.)

## Gritty Details: When Unnamed Objects Are Copied

There are two corner cases where a use of an object with no name results in a
copy anyway:

*   Constructing base classes: in the base class initializer list of a
    constructor, copies will be made even when constructing from an unnamed
    expression of the base class type. This is because classes may have a
    somewhat different layout and representation when used as base classes (due
    to virtual base classes and vpointer values), so initializing base classes
    directly may not result in a correct representation.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
class DerivedThing : public BigExpensiveThing {
 public:
  DerivedThing() : BigExpensiveThing(MakeAThing()) {}  // might copy data_
};
</pre>

*   Passing or returning small trivial objects: when a sufficiently small object
    that is trivially copyable is passed to or returned from a function, it may
    be passed in registers, and hence may have a different address before and
    after it is passed.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
struct Strange {
  int n;
  int *p = &n;
};
void f(Strange s) {
  CHECK(s.p == &s.n);  // might fail
}
void g() { f(Strange{0}); }
</pre>

## Gritty Details: Value Category

There are two flavors of expression in C++:

*   Those that produce a value, such as `1`, or `MakeAThing()` -- expressions
    that you might consider to have a non-reference type.
*   Those that produce the location of some existing object, such as `s` or
    `thing.data_[5]` -- expressions that you might consider to have a reference
    type.

This division is called the "value category"; the former are *prvalues* and the
latter are *glvalues*. When we talked about objects without a name above, what
we were really referring to was prvalue expressions.

All prvalue expressions are evaluated in some context that determines where they
put their value, and the execution of the prvalue expression initializes that
location with its value.

For example, in

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
  BigExpensiveThing thing = MakeAThing();
</pre>

the prvalue expression `MakeAThing()` is evaluated as the initializer of the
`thing` variable, so `MakeAThing()` will directly initialize `thing`. The
constructor passes a pointer to `thing` into `MakeAThing()`, and the `return`
statement in `MakeAThing()` initializes whatever the pointer points to.
Similarly, in

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
  return BigExpensiveThing();
</pre>

the compiler has a pointer to an object to initialize, and initializes that
object directly by calling the `BigExpensiveThing` constructor.

## Related Reading

*   [Tip #11: Return Policy](/tips/11)
*   [Tip #24: Copies, Abbrv.](/tips/24)
*   [Tip #77: Temporaries, moves, and copies](/tips/77)
*   [Tip #117: Copy Elision and Pass-by-Value](/tips/117)
