---
title: "Tip of the Week #108: Avoid <code>std::bind</code>"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/108
type: markdown
order: "108"
---

Originally posted as TotW #108 on January 7, 2016

*By [Roman Perepelitsa](mailto:roman.perepelitsa@gmail.com)*

Updated 2020-08-19

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/108](https://abseil.io/tips/108)


## Avoid <code>std::bind</code>

This Tip summarizes reasons why you should stay away from `std::bind()` when
writing code.

Using `std::bind()` correctly is hard. Let's look at a few examples. Does this
code look good to you?

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void DoStuffAsync(std::function&lt;void(absl::Status)&gt; cb);

class MyClass {
  void Start() {
    DoStuffAsync(std::bind(&MyClass::OnDone, this));
  }
  void OnDone(absl::Status status);
};
</pre>

Many seasoned C++ engineers have written code like this only to find that it
doesn't compile. It works with `std::function<void()>` but breaks when you add
an extra parameter to `MyClass::OnDone`. What gives?

**`std::bind()` doesn't just bind the first N arguments** like many C++
engineers expect (this is called
[partial function application](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partial_application)).
You must instead specify every argument, so the correct incantation of
`std::bind()` is this:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::bind(&MyClass::OnDone, this, std::placeholders::_1)
</pre>

Ugh, that's ugly. Is there a better way? Why yes, use
[`absl::bind_front()`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/functional/bind_front.h)
instead.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
absl::bind_front(&MyClass::OnDone, this)
</pre>

Remember partial function application -- the thing that `std::bind()` *does not
do*? Well, `absl::bind_front()` does exactly that: it binds the first N
arguments and perfect-forwards the rest: `absl::bind_front(F, a, b)(x, y)`
evaluates to `F(a, b, x, y)`.

Ahhh, sanity is restored. Want to see something truly terrifying now? What does
this code do?

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void DoStuffAsync(std::function&lt;void(absl::Status)&gt; cb);

class MyClass {
  void Start() {
    DoStuffAsync(std::bind(&MyClass::OnDone, this));
  }
  void OnDone();  // No absl::Status here.
};
</pre>

`OnDone()` takes no parameters, the `DoStuffAsync()` callback should take a
`absl::Status`. You might expect a compile error here but this code actually
compiles without warnings, because `std::bind` over-aggressively bridges the
gap. Potential errors from `DoStuffAsync()` get silently ignored.

Code like this can cause serious damage. Thinking that some IO has succeeded
when it actually hasn't can be devastating. Perhaps the author of `MyClass`
didn't realize that `DoStuffAsync()` may produce an error that needs to be
handled. Or maybe `DoStuffAsync()` used to accept `std::function<void()>` and
then its author decided to introduce the error mode and updated all callers that
stopped compiling. Either way the bug made its way into production code.

**`std::bind()` disables one of the basic compile time checks** that we all rely
on. The compiler usually tells you if the caller is passing more arguments than
you expect, but not for `std::bind()`. Terrifying enough?

Another example. What do you think of this one?

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void Process(std::unique_ptr&lt;Request&gt; req);

void ProcessAsync(std::unique_ptr&lt;Request&gt; req) {
  thread::DefaultQueue()-&gt;Add(
      ToCallback(std::bind(&MyClass::Process, this, std::move(req))));
}
</pre>

Good old passing `std::unique_ptr` across async boundaries. Needless to say,
`std::bind()` isn't a solution -- the code doesn't compile, because
`std::bind()` doesn't move the bound move-only argument to the target function.
Simply replacing `std::bind()` with `absl::bind_front()` fixes it.

The next example regularly trips even C++ experts. See if you can find the
problem.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// F must be callable without arguments.
template &lt;class F&gt;
void DoStuffAsync(F cb) {
  auto DoStuffAndNotify = [](F cb) {
    DoStuff();
    cb();
  };
  thread::DefaultQueue()-&gt;Schedule(std::bind(DoStuffAndNotify, cb));
}

class MyClass {
  void Start() {
    DoStuffAsync(std::bind(&MyClass::OnDone, this));
  }
  void OnDone();
};
</pre>

This doesn't compile because **passing the result of `std::bind()` to another
`std::bind()` is a special case**. Normally, `std::bind(F, arg)()` evaluates to
`F(arg)`, *except* when `arg` is the result of another `std::bind()` call, in
which case it evaluates to `F(arg())`. If `arg` is converted to
`std::function<void()>`, the magic behavior is lost.

**Applying std::bind() to a type you don't control is always a bug**.
`DoStuffAsync()` shouldn't apply `std::bind()` to the template argument. Either
`absl::bind_front()` or lambda would work fine.

The author of `DoStuffAsync()` might even have entirely green tests because they
always pass a lambda or `std::function` as the argument but never the result of
`std::bind()`. The author of `MyClass` will be puzzled when hitting on this bug.

Is this special case of `std::bind()` ever useful? Not really. It only gets in
the way. If you are composing functions by writing nested `std::bind()` calls,
you really should write a lambda or a named function instead.

Hopefully you are convinced that it's easy to go wrong with `std::bind()`.
Runtime and compile time traps are easy to fall into both for newcomers and C++
experts. Now I'll try to show that even when `std::bind()` is used correctly,
there is usually another option that is more readable.

**Calls to `std::bind()` without placeholders are better off as lambdas.**

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::bind(&MyClass::OnDone, this)
</pre>

vs

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
[this]() { OnDone(); }
</pre>

**Calls to std::bind() that perform partial application are better off as
absl::bind_front().** The more placeholders you have, the more obvious it gets.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::bind(&MyClass::OnDone, this, std::placeholders::_1)
</pre>

vs

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
absl::bind_front(&MyClass::OnDone, this)
</pre>

(Whether to use `absl::bind_front()` or a lambda when performing partial
function application is a judgement call; use your discretion.)

This covers 99% of all calls `std::bind()`. The remaining calls do something
fancy:

*   Ignore some of the arguments: `std::bind(F, _2)`.
*   Use the same argument more than once: `std::bind(F, _1, _1)`.
*   Bind arguments at the end: `std::bind(F, _1, 42)`.
*   Change argument order: `std::bind(F, _2, _1)`.
*   Use function composition: `std::bind(F, std::bind(G))`.

These advanced uses may have their place. Before resorting to them, consider all
known issues with `std::bind()` and ask yourself whether the potential savings
of a few characters or lines of code are worth it.

### Conclusion

Avoid `std::bind`. Use a lambda or `absl::bind_front` instead.

### Further Reading

''Effective Modern C++'', Item 34: Prefer lambdas to `std::bind`.
