---
title: "Tip of the Week #147: Use Exhaustive `switch` Statements Responsibly"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/147
type: markdown
order: "147"
---

Originally published as totw/147 on 2018-04-25

*by Jim Newsome [(jnewsome@google.com)](mailto:jnewsome@google.com)*

## Introduction

Using the `-Werror` compiler flag, a `switch` statement over a value of an
`enum` type without a `default` label will fail to compile if any enumerator of
the `enum` doesn't have a corresponding `case`. This is sometimes called an
*exhaustive* or *defaultless* `switch` statement.

An exhaustive `switch` statement is an excellent construct for ensuring at
compile time that every enumerator of a given enum is explicitly handled.
However, we must ensure that we handle the fall-through case when the variable
(legally!) has a non-enumerator value, and one of:

1.  The `enum`-owner guarantees no new enumerators will be added,
2.  The `enum`-owner is willing and able to fix our code when new enumerators
    are added (e.g. the `enum` definition is part of the same project),
3.  The `enum`-owner will not be blocked by breaking our build (e.g. their code
    is in a separate source control repository), and we're willing to be forced
    to update our `switch` statements when updating to the latest version of the
    `enum`-owner's code.

### An Initial Attempt

Suppose we are writing a function that maps each enumerator of an `enum` to a
`std::string`. We decide to use an exhaustive switch statement to ensure we
didn't forget to handle any of the enumerators:

```c++ {.bad}
std::string AnEnumToString(AnEnum an_enum) {
  switch (an_enum) {
    case kFoo:
      return "kFoo";
    case kBar:
      return "kBar";
    case kBaz:
      return "kBaz";
  }
}
```

Assuming that `AnEnum` indeed has only those three enumerators, this code will
compile, and will seem to have the desired effect. However, there are two
important issues that must be accounted for.

## Enums with Non-Enumerator Values

In C++, enums are permitted to have values other than the explicit enumerators.
All enums can legally take on at least all of the values representable by an
integral type with just enough bits to represent every enumerator, and enums
with a fixed underlying type (e.g. those declared with `enum class`) can take on
any value representable by that type. This is sometimes intentionally leveraged
to use an [`enum` as a bitfield][godbolt-link] or to represent enumerators that
didn't exist when we compiled our code (as in
[proto 3](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/cpp-generated#enum)).

So what happens in our code if `an_enum` isn't one of the handled enumerator
types?

In general when a `switch` statement doesn't have a `case` matching the `switch`
condition and doesn't have a `default` case, execution falls through past the
whole `switch` statement. This can lead to surprising behavior; in our example
it leads to **undefined behavior**. After execution falls through the `switch`
statement, it reaches the end of the function without returning a value, which
is undefined behavior for a function with a non-void return type.

We can address this issue by explicitly handling the case where execution falls
through the `switch` statement. This ensures we always get defined and
predictable behavior at run time, while continuing to benefit from the
compile-time check that all enumerators are explicitly handled.

In our example, we'll log a warning and return a sentinel value. Another
reasonable alternative, especially if we're convinced that the function
(currently) *can't* receive a non-enumerator value, would be to immediately
crash with a debuggable error message and stack trace, e.g. using `LOG(FATAL)`.

```c++ {.bad}
std::string AnEnumToString(AnEnum an_enum) {
  switch (an_enum) {
    case kFoo:
      return "kFoo";
    case kBar:
      return "kBar";
    case kBaz:
      return "kBaz";
  }
  LOG(ERROR) << "Unexpected value for AnEnum: " << an_enum;
  return kUnknownAnEnumString;
}
```

We've now ensured that something reasonable happens for *any* possible value of
`an_enum`, but there's still potentially a problem.

## What Happens When a New Enumerator Is Added?

Suppose someone later wants to add a new enumerator to `AnEnum`. Doing so causes
`AnEnumToString` to no longer compile. Whether that's a bug or a feature depends
on who owns `AnEnum` and what guarantees they provide.

If `AnEnum` is part of the same project as `AnEnumToString`, then the engineer
adding a new enumerator is likely to be blocked from submitting their change
before fixing `AnEnumToString` due to compilation errors. They are also
reasonably likely to be willing and able to do so. In this case our use of an
exhaustive `switch` statement is a win: it successfully ensured that the
`switch` statement is updated appropriately, and everyone is happy.

Similarly, if `AnEnum` is part of a different project in a *different
repository*, then the breakage won't surface until the engineers on our project
try to update to a newer version of that code. If we expect that those engineers
will be willing and able to fix the `switch` statement, then all is well.

However, if `AnEnum` is owned by a different project in the *same repository*
the situation is a bit more precarious. A change to `AnEnum` might cause our
code to greak at head, and the engineer making the change might not be willing
or able to fix it for us. Indeed, if there were many similar exhaustive `switch`
statements over `AnEnum`, it'd be extremely challenging for them to fix all such
usages.

For these reasons, it's best to use exhaustive `switch` statements only on
`enum` types that either we own, or whose owner has explicitly guaranteed that
no new enumerators will be added.

In our example, let's suppose that `AnEnum` is owned by a different project, but
the documentation promises that no new enumerators will be added. Let's add a
comment so that future readers understand our reasoning.

```c++ {.good}
std::string AnEnumToString(AnEnum an_enum) {
  switch (an_enum) {
    case kFoo:
      return "kFoo";
    case kBar:
      return "kBar";
    case kBaz:
      return "kBaz";
    // No default. The API of AnEnum guarantees no new enumerators will be
    // added.
  }
  LOG(ERROR) << "Unexpected value for AnEnum: " << an_enum;
  return kUnknownAnEnumString;
}
```

## Conclusions

Exhaustive `switch` statements can be an excellent tool for ensuring that all
enumerators are explicitly handled, provided that we:

*   Explicitly handle the case where the `enum` has a non-enumerator value,
    falling through the entire `switch` statement. In particular if the
    enclosing function has a return value, we must ensure that the function
    still either returns a value or crashes in a well-defined and debuggable
    way.
*   Ensure that one of:
    *   The owner of the `enum` type either guarantees no new enumerators will
        be added,
    *   The owner of the `enum` is willing and able to fix our code when new
        enumerators are aded,
    *   If our code uses exhaustive switch statements and is broken due to an
        enumerator being added, the owner of the `enum` is not blocked by this
        breakage.

When making an `enum` type available to other projects, we should either:

*   Explicitly guarantee that no new enumerators will be added, so that users
    can take advantage of exhaustive `switch` statements.
*   Explicitly reserve the right to add new enumerators without notice, to
    discourage consumers from writing exhaustive `switch` statements. One
    idiomatic way of doing so is to add a sentinel enumerator clearly not meant
    to be used in API consumers' exhaustive switch statements; e.g.
    `kNotForUseWithExhaustiveSwitchStatements`.

## FAQ

*   Why does the compiler allow omitting a `return` statement after an
    exhaustive `switch`?

    Omitting a final return *can* be safe if additional steps are taken to
    ensure that the `enum` variable can only be one of its enumerators. It's
    often better in such cases to still defensively add a final `return` or
    `LOG(FATAL)`, but enough legacy code exists without those that google3's
    default compiler flags allow code to compile without them.

*   The enum I'm switching on already has exhaustive switch statements all over
    the place. Since the owners are already effectively prevented from adding
    new enumerators, won't adding my own exhaustive switch statement be
    harmless?

    It's usually better to get an explicit policy from the owner before further
    increasing their maintenance burden.

*   What about protobuf enums?

    For authoritative guidance, see the
    [protobuf documentation](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/cpp-generated#enum).

    Exhaustive `switch` statements on proto3 `enum` types are **not
    recommended**. The parser *doesn't* guarantee that `enum` fields will have
    enumerator values. Additionally, it's not possible to write an exhaustive
    `switch` statement over proto3 `enum` types without referencing special
    sentinel enumerators that should be considered internal implementation
    details of the protobuf tools.

    Exhaustive `switch` statements on proto2 `enum` types that you own (or whose
    owners guarantee will never be moved to proto3 and will never have new
    enumerators added) are safe and recommended by the protobuf team. The
    protobuf parser guarantees that `enum` fields will be assigned a
    compile-time enumerator, though care should still be taken if the `enum`
    value isn't guaranteed to have come from the parser (e.g. if it's part of a
    `proto` object received as a function parameter).

*   What about scoped enumerations (`enum class`)?

    Everything in this tip applies to all enumeration types in C++ at time of
    writing (i.e. through at least C++20).

## References

*   [Enum handling in protobuf generated
    code](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/cpp-generated#enum)
*   [C++ enum specification](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/enum)

[godbolt-link]: https://godbolt.org/#g:!((g:!((g:!((h:codeEditor,i:(j:1,lang:c%2B%2B,source:'%23include+<cstdint>%0A%0A//+kEnableX+%7C+kEnableY+%3D+3+is+a+legal+and+reasonable+value+for+a+MyFlags.%0Aenum+MyFlags+:+uint32_t+%7B%0A++++kEnableX+%3D+1,%0A++++kEnableY+%3D+1+<<+1,++//+2%0A++++kEnableZ+%3D+1+<<+2,++//+4%0A%7D%3B'),l:'5',n:'0',o:'C%2B%2B+source+%231',t:'0')),k:51.75805047867712,l:'4',n:'0',o:'',s:0,t:'0'),(g:!((h:compiler,i:(compiler:clang800,filters:(b:'0',binary:'1',commentOnly:'0',demangle:'0',directives:'0',execute:'1',intel:'0',libraryCode:'1',trim:'1'),lang:c%2B%2B,libs:!(),options:'',source:1),l:'5',n:'0',o:'x86-64+clang+8.0.0+(Editor+%231,+Compiler+%231)+C%2B%2B',t:'0'),(h:output,i:(compiler:1,editor:1,wrap:'1'),l:'5',n:'0',o:'%231+with+x86-64+clang+8.0.0',t:'0')),k:48.241949521322894,l:'4',n:'0',o:'',s:0,t:'0')),l:'2',n:'0',o:'',t:'0')),version:4
