---
title: "Tip of the Week #161: Good Locals and Bad Locals"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/161
type: markdown
order: "161"
---

Originally published as totw/161 on 2019-04-16

*By James Dennett [(jdennett@google.com)](mailto:jdennett@google.com)*

Updated 2019-11-25

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/161](https://abseil.io/tips/161)

*We may freak out globally, but we suffer locally. -- Jonathan Franzen*

## Synopsis

Local variables are great, but can be overused. We can often simplify code by
restricting their use to situations in which they provide a specific benefit.

## Recommendations

Use local variables only when one or more of the following applies:

*   Their name adds useful documentation.
*   They simplify excessively complicated expressions.
*   They factor out a repeated expression to make it clear to humans (and to a
    lesser extent compilers) that it's the same value every time.
*   An object's lifetime needs to extend across multiple statements (for
    example, because references to the object are retained beyond the end of a
    single statement or because the variable holds a value that is updated
    during its lifetime).

In other cases, consider removing a layer of indirection by eliminating the
local variable and writing the expression directly where it's used.

## Rationale

Naming values adds a level of indirection to code comprehension unless the
variable's name fully captures the relevant aspects of its meaning. Giving a
name to a value in C++ also exposes it to the rest of the scope. It also affects
the "value category", as every named variable is an lvalue even if declared as
an rvalue reference and initialized from an rvalue. This can require additional
uses of `std::move`, which warrant care during code review to avoid
use-after-move bugs. Given these downsides, use of local variables is best
reserved for situations in which it provides a specific benefit.

## Examples: Bad Uses of Local Variables

#### Eliminating a local variable that's immediately returned

As a simple example of eliminating an unhelpful local variable, instead of

```
// BAD
MyType value = SomeExpression(args);
return value;
```

prefer

```
return SomeExpression(args);
```

#### Inline expressions under test into GoogleTest's `EXPECT_THAT`

```
// BAD
auto actual = SortedAges(args);
EXPECT_THAT(actual, ElementsAre(21, 42, 63));
```

Here the variable name `actual` doesn't add anything useful (`EXPECT_THAT`
always takes the actual value as its first argument), it's not simplifying a
complicated expression, and its value is used once only. Inlining the expression
as in

```
EXPECT_THAT(SortedAges(args), ElementsAre(21, 42, 63));
```

makes it clear at a glance what's being tested, and by avoiding giving a name to
`actual` ensures that it cannot be unintentionally re-used. It also allows the
testing framework to show the failing call in error output.

#### Use matchers to eliminate variables in tests.

[Matchers](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googlemock/docs/cheat_sheet.md)
can help to avoid the need to name local variables in tests by allowing
`EXPECT_THAT` to directly express everything we expect of a value. Instead of
writing code like this

```
// BAD
absl::optional<std::vector<int>> maybe_ages = GetAges(args);
ASSERT_NE(maybe_ages, absl::nullopt);
std::vector<int> ages = ages.value();
ASSERT_EQ(ages.size(), 3);
EXPECT_EQ(ages[0], 21);
EXPECT_EQ(ages[1], 42);
EXPECT_EQ(ages[2], 63);
```

where we have to be careful to write `ASSERT*` instead of `EXPECT*` to avoid
crashes. We can express the intent directly in code:

```
EXPECT_THAT(GetAges(args),
            Optional(ElementsAre(21, 42, 63));
```

## Examples: Good Uses of Local Variables

#### Factoring out a repeated expression

```
// BAD
myproto.mutable_submessage()->mutable_subsubmessage()->set_foo(21);
myproto.mutable_submessage()->mutable_subsubmessage()->set_bar(42);
myproto.mutable_submessage()->mutable_subsubmessage()->set_baz(63);
```

Here the repetition makes the code verbose (sometimes requiring unfortunate line
breaks), and can require more effort from readers to see that this is setting
three fields of the same proto message. Using a local variable to alias the
relevant message can clean it up:

```
auto& subsubmessage = *myproto.mutable_submessage()->mutable_subsubmessage();
subsubmessage.set_foo(21);
subsubmessage.set_bar(42);
subsubmessage.set_baz(63);
```

Note: Specify the type of the reference explicitly when it helps readability,
and use `auto` only to ["avoid type names that are noisy, obvious, or
unimportant - cases where the type doesn't aid in clarity for the
reader"](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#auto).


In some cases this can also help the compiler to generate better code as it
doesn't need to prove that the repeated expression returns the same value each
time. Beware of premature optimization, though: if eliminating a common
subexpression doesn't help human readers, profile before trying to help the
compiler.

#### Giving meaningful names to pair and tuple elements

While it's usually better to use a `struct` with meaningfully-named fields than
a `pair` or a `tuple`, we can mitigate the problems with `pair` and `tuple` by
binding meaningfully-named aliases to their elements. For example, instead of

```
// BAD
for (const auto& name_and_age : ages_by_name) {
  if (IsDisallowedName(name_and_age.first)) continue;
  if (name_and_age.second < 18) children.insert(name_and_age.first);
}
```

in C++11 we could write

```
for (const auto& name_and_age : ages_by_name) {
  const auto& name = name_and_age.first;
  const auto& age = name_and_age.second;

  if (IsDisallowedName(name)) continue;
  if (age < 18) children.insert(name);
}
```

and in C++17, we can more simply use "structured bindings" to achieve the same
result of giving meaningful names:

```
for (const auto& [name, age] : ages_by_name) {
  if (IsDisallowedName(name)) continue;
  if (age < 18) children.insert(name);
}
```
