---
title: "Abseil Random"
layout: blog
sidenav: side-nav-blog.html
published: true
permalink: blog/20191121-random
type: markdown
category: blog
excerpt_separator: <!--break-->
---

By [Andy Soffer](mailto:asoffer@google.com), Engineer

We are happy to announce the arrival of the Abseil Random library, providing
simple tools for generating random numbers and testing code that generates
random numbers.

Abseil now includes a random number generation library, which can be found in
[`absl/random/`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/tree/master/absl/random/).
The library includes

*   Drop-in replacements for some distributions available through the standard
    library `<random>` header, with some modest performance improvements.
*   Two good default bit generators for users without the domain expertise
    to make meaningful choices amongst the many options available in the
    standard.
*   Distribution functions that provide a simple interface for generating random
    values.
*   A bit-generator
    ([`absl::MockingBitGen`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/tree/master/absl/random/mocking_bit_gen.h))
    that, with [GoogleTest](https://github.com/google/googletest), enables
    deterministic testing of application code.

This blog post discusses how to get started using this library. For a more
detailed explanation on the design of the helper functions and testing
facilities provided by this library, take a look at our [design
note][random-design].

Happy sampling!

## Bit generation

We provide several bit generators:

*   [`absl::BitGen`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/random/random.h):
    A general-purpose random bit generator whose default constructor is seeded
    correctly.
*   [`absl::InsecureBitGen`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/random/random.h):
    A fast bit generator for performance-sensitive use cases when the
    computational cost of `absl::BitGen` is prohibitively expensive.
*   [`absl::MockingBitGen`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/random/mocking_bit_gen.h):
    A bit generator to be used only in unit tests. For details, see the [design
    note][random-design].
*   [`absl::BitGenRef`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/random/bit_gen_ref.h):
    A type-erased reference to a bit generator. Used primarily as a means of
    swapping bit generators at run-time.

For the bit generator, we recommend using `absl::BitGen` unless you have
specific performance requirements and have thoroughly vetted
`absl::InsecureBitGen` for your use case. Neither `absl::BitGen` nor
`absl::InsecureBitGen` are guaranteed to be cryptographically secure.

Bit generators are well-seeded by default, so default constructing an
`absl::BitGen` is a correct and intended usage. All of our bit generators
provide no stability guarantees. The implementation may change at any time, and
the sequence of variates produced need not be the same, even between two
invocations of the same process.

## Distribution function templates

Distribution function templates are thin wrappers around distribution objects
that provide a straightforward API for getting randomness.  A generator should
be passed to a distribution function as in the examples below:

```cpp
// Using the C++ standard <random> facilities
std::random_device rd;
std:mt19937 gen(rd());

int die_roll = std::uniform_int_distribution<> die_dist(1, 6);
bool fair_coin_landed_heads = std::bernoulli_distribution coin_dist(0.5);

// Using Abseil Random
absl::BitGen gen;

int die_roll = absl::Uniform(absl::IntervalClosedClosed, gen, 1, 6);
bool fair_coin_landed_heads = absl::Bernoulli(gen, 0.5);
```

The full list of distribution functions provided can be seen in
[distributions.h](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/random/distributions.h).

## Testing facilities

For testing functions that require randomness, we provide `absl::MockingBitGen`,
a bit generator that enables a test author to specify the result of a
call to a distribution. As you will notice in the code-snippet below, this is
*not* done via a deterministic bit generator (for reasons discusesd in the
[design note][random-design]). Rather, `absl::MockingBitGen` allows the user
to specify the result not of the bit generator, but of the entire random sample.
The design note goes into detail about why we believe this is a maintainable
approach to testing code with random behavior. These testing facilities rely on
[GoogleTest](https://github.com/google/googletest).

```cpp
using ::testing::_;
using ::testing::Lt;
using ::testing::Return;

int ComputeValue(absl::BitGenRef gen) {
  if (absl::Bernoulli(gen, 0.00001)) {
    return 10
  } else {
    return 0;
  }
}

TEST(ComputeValueTest, UnlikelyCase) {
  absl::MockingBitGen gen;
  ON_CALL(absl::MockBernoulli(), Call(gen, Lt(0.01))
      .WillByDefault(Return(true));

  EXPECT_EQ(ComputeValue(gen), 10);
}
```

[random-design]: /about/design/random
