---
title: "Tip of the Week #180: Avoiding Dangling References"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/180
type: markdown
order: "180"
---

Originally posted as TotW #180 on June 11, 2020

*By [Titus Winters](mailto:titus@cs.ucr.edu)*

Updated 2020-06-11

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/180](https://abseil.io/tips/180)


## Introduction

Unlike many languages, C++ lacks the safety checks necessary to avoid
referencing invalid memory (aka “dangling references”). You can easily
dereference a pointer to an object that was already `delete`-ed, or follow a
reference to an object that has gone out of scope. Even class types carry this
risk. Importantly, we are building naming conventions around the names `view`
and `span` to signify “This is an object that has reference semantics and may
dangle.” These types, like all types with reference semantics, never own the
underlying data that they point to. Be mindful whenever you see instances of any
of these types stored.

## Dangling, And Understanding C++

If you’re coming to C++ from other languages, there are quite a few fundamental
surprises. The type system is meaningfully more complicated than most languages,
requiring a sometimes-subtle understanding of references, temporaries,
shallow-const, pointers, object lifetimes, etc. One of the most uniquely
important issues when learning C++ is recognizing that having a pointer or a
reference to an object doesn’t mean the object still exists. C++ is not
garbage-collected nor reference-counted, and as a result holding a handle to an
object isn’t enough to ensure the object stays alive.

Consider:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
int* int_handle;
{
  int foo = 42;
  int_handle = &foo;
}
std::cout &lt;&lt; *int_handle &lt;&lt; "\n";  // Boom
</pre>

When we dereference `int_handle` with `operator*`, we are following a pointer to
an object whose lifetime is ended. This is a bug. Formally, this is *undefined
behavior*, and anything can happen.

Distressingly, one of the “anything can happen” options is “this does what you
naively think it might” - printing 42. *C++ is a language that does not promise
to diagnose or react to your bugs.* The fact that your program seems to work
does not mean it is correct. It means at best that the compiler happened to
choose an outcome that worked for you. But make no mistake: this is no less
buggy than if `int_handle` was a pointer to `null`.

From this we draw two important points:

*   Unlike most languages we use today, the fact that a program runs to
    completion or behaves as expected is only weakly correlated with “this is
    correct.” Other languages would diagnose (at compile time or runtime) our
    errors, C++ chooses to focus instead on optimization and efficiency:
    spending extra computing power to check that you didn’t make an error isn’t
    the C++ way. In most languages “It works” is much better evidence for “It is
    correct.” C++ requires that we question that evidence.
*   Holding a handle (a pointer or reference) to an object does not guarantee
    that the object is alive and valid to access. Other languages have runtime
    overhead to keep objects alive, or statically constrain the code you can
    write. C++ focuses instead on optimization and efficiency. Anytime you use a
    handle to access the underlying object you need a mental proof to understand
    why you’re sure the underlying object is still alive. It may have gone out
    of scope, it may have been explicitly `delete`-ed.

It is critically important to understand that our informal “handle” discussion
applies to values of certain class types as well as to the more-obvious pointers
and references. Consider iterators:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::vector&lt;int&gt;::iterator int_handle;
{
  std::vector&lt;int&gt; v = {42};
  int_handle = v.begin();
}
std::cout &lt;&lt; *int_handle &lt;&lt; "\n"; // Boom
</pre>

This is morally identical to the previous example. On some platforms, `vector`
iterators may in fact be implemented as pointers. Even if these iterators are
class types, the same language rules apply: dereferencing the iterator will
(under the hood) eventually be following a pointer or reference to an object
that is no longer in scope (in this case, `v[0]`).

Because C++ does not define what happens when code uses an invalid pointer,
reference, or iterator, code that does so is *always* incorrect (even if it
appears to work). This allows debugging tools such as sanitizers and debugging
iterators to report bugs with no false positives.

## Class Types that May Dangle

Over the past few years, Abseil and the C++ standard library have been
introducing additional class types with similar “handle” behavior. The most
common of these is `string_view`, which is a handle to some contiguous buffer of
characters (often a `string`). Holding a `string_view` is exactly like holding
any other handle type: there is no general guarantee that the underlying data
lives. It is up the programmer to prove that the underlying buffer outlives the
`string_view`. Importantly the handle that `string_view` provides does not allow
for mutation: a `string_view` cannot be used to modify the underlying data.

Another handle design that is becoming common is `span<T>`, which is a
contiguous buffer of any type `T`. If `T` is non-const, then `span` allows
mutation of the underlying data. If `T` is const, then the `span` cannot modify
it, in the same fashion that `string_view` cannot modify the underlying buffer.
Thus, `span<const char>` is similar to `string_view`. Although the two types
have different APIs, reasoning about the handles or underlying buffers works in
exactly the same way.

`string_view` and `span` tend to be very safe to use as function parameters,
abstracting away from a variety of input argument formats. Because of the
possibility of a dangling reference, any time that types of this design are
*stored*, they become a significant source of programmer error. Every storage of
any handle type requires critical thinking to understand why we are sure the
underlying object stays valid for the lifetime of the *handle*. Using
`string_view` or `span` in a container is not always wrong but is a subtle
optimization that warrants clear comments describing the associated storage.
Using these types for data members of a class is rarely the right choice.

It is critically important going forward that C++ programmers understand these
design patterns, and how to use these “reference parameter types.” To assist in
that understanding, type designers and library providers tend toward the
following meaning for types:

*   **view** - a reference type that cannot be used to mutate the underlying
    data
*   **span** - a reference type that might be used to mutate the underlying data

Since both of these naming indicators suggest reference types, any storage of a
library-provided type called a “view” or a “span” needs to be accompanied by the
same logic you would use when thinking about the lifetimes of a pointer or
reference: how do I know that the underlying object is still alive?

## Caveats and Further Reading

The popular external [range\_v3](https://github.com/ericniebler/range-v3)
library and the upcoming C++20 ranges library have a different meaning for
“view”, although the types described by these definitions overlap. In ranges,
“view” means “a range that can be copied in O(1)”. This includes `string_view`.
However, this definition does not preclude mutation of the underlying data. This
mismatch is unfortunate, and largely recognized by the C++ standards committee,
but nobody could find consensus on any alternative to “view” after the concern
was raised.

The C++20 [`span`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/span) type and
Abseil’s
[`Span`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/types/span.h)
type have slightly different interfaces and semantics when it comes to
comparability and copying. The most notable difference is with
`absl::Span::operator==`, which [we now know](http://wg21.link/P1085R2) to
probably be a design mistake.

For more on the design theory underlying modern reference parameter types, see
[Revisiting Regular Types](https://abseil.io/blog/20180531-regular-types).
