---
title: "Tip of the Week #90: Retired Flags"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/90
type: markdown
order: "090"
---

Originally posted as TotW #90 on March 19, 2015

*by [Titus Winters](mailto:titus@google.com)

One of the frustrating things about our (mis)use of command-line flags in
google3 is the difficulty in removing a flag from binary and production
servers safely (revisit https://abseil.io/tips/45 for some frustrating
misuses). The trouble? A binary won’t start if you specify a flag that is
no longer defined, and thus removal of flags may require coordination
between C++ code and your running binaries.

In some cases, this coordination can be quite challenging (conditioning
production code based on a binary version). If only there were a better way!

There is. A while back we added a new concept to the C++ command-line flags
system called "retired flags" ([`ABSL_RETIRED_FLAG`][1]).

A retired flag creates no symbol in C++ (no more `FLAGS_some_flag` global
variable to rely upon), does not appear in `--help`, but will be accepted when
specified on the command line (although an `ERROR` will be logged). In this way,
flags that are no longer used by the code can be "retired", separating C++
changes from production code changes. Once the configuration changes are all
clear, the retired flag can be removed once and for all.

Retired flags were designed to be used in many situations (including cases
involving components or other non-atomic commit requirements). A step-by-step
for a very simple flag retirement could look like this:

1.  Remove uses of `FLAGS_frobber` from code.

    If you’re following the advice of https://abseil.io/tips/45 and using
    flags primarily from `main()` this should be easy to do and to check
    for.

2.  Change the definition of the flag to retire it. That is:

    ```c++
    ABSL_FLAG(type, frobber, "default", "Which frobber to use?");
    ```

    should become:

    ```c++
    ABSL_RETIRED_FLAG(type, frobber, "default", "retired");
    ```

3.  Wait for binary release(s). Once all the jobs in all of your serving cells
    are invoking the new binary, you can continue.

4.  Remove the flag from your production code. Once searching the relevant production
    code shows no hits for the frobber flag, you can continue.

5.  Remove the retired flag.

We’ve had success with very complicated flag removals: the motivating example
for this effort was the removal of flags defined in s legacy filesystem, which
was more complicated because the flags were defined in a library (and thus used
in numerous binaries). From what we’ve seen, even the most complicated flag
removals can be enabled safely with this system. So, the next time you’re
wondering how to remove a flag safely, consider retiring it first and taking
it step-by-step.

[1]: https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/flags/flag.h#L255