---
title: "Tip of the Week #116: Keeping References on Arguments"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/116
type: markdown
order: "116"
---

Originally posted as TotW #116 on May 26, 2016

*By [Alex Pilkiewicz](mailto:pilki@google.com)*

Updated 2020-06-01

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/116](https://abseil.io/tips/116)


*From painting to image, from image to text, from text to voice, a sort of
imaginary pointer indicates, shows, fixes, locates, imposes a system of
references, tries to stabilize a unique space. — This is Not a Pipe by Michel
Foucault*

## Const References vs. Pointers to Const

Used as arguments of functions, const references have several advantages when
compared to pointers to const: they cannot be null and it's quite clear that the
function is not taking ownership of the object. But they have other differences
that can sometimes be problematic: they are more implicit (i.e. there is nothing
on the call site showing we are taking a reference) and they can be bound to a
temporary.

## Risk of a Dangling Reference in Classes

Consider the following class as an example:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class Foo {
 public:
  explicit Foo(const std::string& content) : content_(content) {}
  const std::string& content() const { return content_; }

 private:
  const std::string& content_;
};
</pre>

It looks reasonable. But what happens if we build a `Foo` from a string literal?

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void Func() {
  Foo foo("something");
  std::cout &lt;&lt; foo.content();  // BOOM!
}
</pre>

When creating `foo`, the `content_` member gets bound to the temporary
`std::string` object that was created from the literal and passed to the
constructor. The temporary string goes out of scope at the end of the line where
it was created. Now `foo.content_` is a reference to an object that no longer
exists. Accessing it is undefined behavior and anything can happen, from working
fine in tests to going really wrong in production.

## A Solution: Use Pointers

In our example, the simplest solution is probably to pass and store the string
by value. But let's assume that we need to refer to the original argument, e.g.
because it's not a string, but some more interesting type. The solution is to
pass the argument by pointer:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class Foo {
 public:
  // Do not forget this comment:
  // Does not take ownership of content, which must refer to a valid string that
  // outlives this object.
  explicit Foo(const std::string* content) : content_(content) {}
  const std::string& content() const { return *content_; }

 private:
  const std::string* const content_;  // not owned, can't be null
};
</pre>

Now the following will simply fail to compile:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::string GetString();
void Func() {
  Foo foo1(&GetString());  // error: taking the address of a temporary of
                           // type 'std::string'
  Foo foo2(&"something");  // error: no matching constructor for initialization
                           // of 'Foo'
}
</pre>

And it will be pretty clear at call site that the object might keep the address
of the argument:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void Func2() {
  std::string content = GetString();
  Foo foo(&content);
}
</pre>

## One Step Further, One Less Comment: Storing a Reference

You might have noticed that we say twice that the pointer cannot be null and
that it is not owned, once in the documentation of the constructor then in the
comment for the instance variable. Is this necessary? Consider this:
<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class Baz {
 public:
  // Does not take any ownership, and all pointers must refer to valid objects
  // that outlive the one constructed.
  explicit Baz(const Arg1* arg1, Arg2* arg2) : arg1_(*arg1), arg2_(*arg2) {}

 private:
  // It is now clear that we do not have ownership and that the references can't
  // be null.
  const Arg1& arg1_;
  Arg2& arg2_;  // Yes, non-const references are style-compliant!
};
</pre>

One downside of members of reference type is that you cannot reassign them,
meaning that your class will not have a copy assignment operator (copy
constructors are still OK) but it might make sense to explicitly delete it to
respect the
[rule of 3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_three_\(C%2B%2B_programming\)).
If your class should be assignable you'll need non-const pointers, still
potentially to const objects.

If you want defense in depth and think some caller might accidentally pass a
null pointer, you can use `*ABSL_DIE_IF_NULL(arg1)` to cause a crash. Note that
just dereferencing the null pointer is not, as is commonly believed, guaranteed
to crash; rather it is undefined behavior and should not be relied upon. Here
what would probably happen is that since a reference is implemented as a
pointer, it will just be copied and the crash will happen later, when someone
actually accesses the field.

## Conclusion

It is still OK to pass an argument by const reference to a constructor if the
argument is copied, or just used in the constructor and no reference to it is
kept in the constructed object. In other cases, consider passing arguments by
pointers (to const or not). Also remember that if you are actually transferring
the ownership of an object, it should be passed as a `std::unique_ptr`.

Lastly, what is discussed here is not limited to constructors: any function that
somehow keeps an alias to one of its arguments, whether by putting a pointer in
a cache or binding the argument in a detached function, should take that
argument by pointer.

## Related Reading

*   [Tip of the Week #5: Disappearing Act](/tips/5)
*   [Tip of the Week #101: Return Values, References, and Lifetimes](/tips/101)
*   [C++ Style Guide: Reference Arguments](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Reference_Arguments)
