---
title: "Tip of the Week #175: Changes to Literal Constants in C++14 and C++17."
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/175
type: markdown
order: "175"
---

Originally posted as TotW #175 on January 30, 2020

*By [James Dennett](mailto:jdennett@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/175](https://abseil.io/tips/175)


"The only thing that stays the same is change" -- Melissa Etheridge

## Overview

C++ now has some features that can make numeric literals more readable.

Integer literals can now be written in binary (`0b00101010`) as well as the
decimal (`42`), hex (`0x2A`), and octal (`052`) formats that have been supported
since the dawn of time.

Single quotes (`'`) serve as digit separators, and can be used to group digits
in numeric literals of any base (`0xDEAD'C0DE`).

Floating point literals can be specified in hex (`0x2A0p-4`).

## Binary Literals

Binary literals such as `0b1110'0000` can be more readable than hex (the next
best option) when manipulating bit sets or working with low-level protocols.
Code that does these things should be rare in google3, where a higher-level
technique is usually a better choice.

## Digit Separators

C++14 allows a single quote (`'`) to be used to group digits in a numeric
literal. These digit separators have no effect on the value of the constant:
their only function is to help readers. They can make it easy to see at a glance
how many digits are present, and know that none are missing. For example,
`1'000'000'000` is more obviously one billion than is `1000000000` (and unlike
`1e9` it is an integer, not a floating point value).

There are no restrictions on the number of digits per group, not even a
requirement of consistency within a literal: `0b1'001'0001` is a valid way to
write the number 145 (and may even make sense for a byte that is interpreted as
three separate fields).

## Hex Floating Point Literals

While most _decimal_ floating point literals are not exactly representable in
the binary floating point formats used by most computers, _hex_ floating
literals do map directly to bit patterns in floating point so long as enough
bits are available. This avoids rounding errors when converting a literal to
floating point format (though truncation errors are still possible if too many
hex digits are present).

Hex floating point literals are indicated by writing a `p` (or `P`) to separate
the significand from the exponent—where decimal floating point literals would
use `e` (or `E`). For example, `0x2Ap12` is another way to write the value `0x2A
<< 12`, i.e., 0x2A000. The exponent is always written in decimal, denotes a
power of 2, and may be negative: `0x1p-10` is (exactly) `1.0/1024`.

## Recommendations

*   Binary literals should be used sparingly, for code which cares about bit
    manipulation.
*   Consider using digit separators when a numeric literal is too long to take
    in at a single glance.
*   When using digit separators, use conventional group sizes:
    *   For decimal, use groups of three digits unless there is a conflicting
        convention (as with some currencies, for example).
    *   For binary, prefer groups of four bits (nibble) or eight bits
        (octet/byte) unless the digits have a more semantically significant
        grouping.
    *   For hex, use groups of 2, 4 or 8 hex digits.

## See Also

*   [Tip of the Week #64: Raw String Literals](64)
