---
title: "Tip of the Week #186: Prefer to Put Functions in the Unnamed Namespace"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/186
type: markdown
order: "186"
---

Originally posted as TotW #186 on November 5, 2020

*By [James Dennett](mailto:jdennett@google.com) and [Jason Rennie](mailto:jrennie@google.com)*

Updated 2020-11-05

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/186](https://abseil.io/tips/186)


*"Everything should be made as simple as possible, but no simpler." ~ Roger
Sessions's interpretation of Einstein*

When adding a new function, default to making it a non-member function local to
the `.cc` file where it is called. While there are valid reasons to make another
choice, consider writing it in an unnamed namespace (also known as an "anonymous
namespace").

## Benefits

Writing a non-member in an unnamed namespace has benefits both by making
functions internal to a `.cc` file (moving them out of header files) as well as
by making them non-members (moving them out of classes).

Benefits over functions declared in a header file include:

*   Making it easy for a reader to look up the definition (since it's in the
    same file as usage and above the first usage).
*   Placing the documentation, declaration, and definition in a single location
    (versus two locations for functions which are declared in a header file).
*   Isolating it from other source files, making it easier to refactor.
*   Removing the need to worry about [meaningful const](/tips/109) as there is
    no separate declaration.
*   Keeping them in the same place as other implementation helpers for a
    library, such as convenience aliases and local types. See
    [Tip of the Week #119: Using-declarations and Namespace Aliases]([Tip #119]\(/tips/119\)).
*   Providing side benefits, such as allowing a type to also be moved to an
    unnamed namespace (if it is only referenced in a single source file).

Benefits over private methods include:

*   Inputs and outputs are clear since they are (much more likely to be)
    specified via arguments or the return value. Note that a method may read any
    member variable and a non-const method may modify any non-const member.
    Conversely, a non-member function may only read or modify according to its
    interface (except for globals).
*   The class API is simpler and shorter, and hence easier to read---unnecessary
    private methods may make it difficult to find inheritance-related private
    declarations or declarations after the class.

## Reasons to Look Elsewhere

Sometimes a non-member local function does not make sense. For example:

*   When the function is useful in multiple source files. Declaring it in a
    header file allows re-use.
*   When the function has complex interactions with an object or class. For
    example, a function that reads from multiple fields and needs to modify
    state in a way that can't be handled naturally via a return value is likely
    better written as a method. In particular, logic involving a mutex usually
    belongs in a member function.
*   When the function belongs as part of an class's API.

## An Alternative: <code>static</code> Non-Member Functions

Marking a non-member function as `static` has essentially the same effect as
placing it inside an unnamed namespace in terms of isolating it from code in
other translation units. While unnamed namespaces do this in a uniform manner
that covers types as well as functions and objects, some people like to see
`static` written explicitly in the declaration of a function to show that it is
local to a translation unit without having to check for an enclosing unnamed
namespace. While this tip recommends using an unnamed namespace, using `static`
can be a reasonable choice.

## Other References

Parts of [the style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html)
point us in this direction, but they don't go as far. For example:

*   [The unnamed namespaces section](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Unnamed_Namespaces_and_Static_Variables)
    encourages that definitions go in an unnamed namespace (or be declared
    `static`), but doesn't talk about private methods.
*   [The inputs and outputs section](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Inputs_and_Outputs)
    encourages using return values, but doesn't address modification of members
    (via `this`); `this` is essentially an uber-input/output parameter.
*   [The local variables section](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Local_Variables)
    encourages minimizing variable scope, but doesn't extend the idea to classes
    and objects.

## Summary

File-local functions simplify dependencies and improve locality. Non-member
functions increase encapsulation, simplify class definitions, and make
dependencies more explicit. When writing a function, consider making it a
file-local non-member function, such as by putting it in an unnamed namespace of
a `.cc` file.
