---
title: "Tip of the Week #187: <code>std::unique_ptr</code> Must Be Moved"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/187
type: markdown
order: "187"
---

Originally posted as TotW #187 on November 5, 2020

*By [Andy Soffer](mailto:asoffer@google.com)*

Updated 2020-11-05

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/187](https://abseil.io/tips/187)


*If you say in the first chapter that there is a `std::unique_ptr` on the wall,
in the second or third chapter it absolutely must be moved. If it's not going to
be moved, it shouldn't be hanging there. ~ With apologies to Anton Chekhov*

A `std::unique_ptr` is used for expressing transfer of ownership. If you never
pass ownership elsewhere, the `std::unique_ptr` abstraction is rarely necessary
or appropriate.

## What is a <code>std::unique_ptr</code>?

A `std::unique_ptr` is a pointer that automatically destroys whatever it is
pointing at when the `std::unique_ptr` itself is destroyed. It exists to convey
ownership (the responsibility to destroy resources) as part of the type system
and is one of C++11's more valuable additions[^unique]. However,
`std::unique_ptr` is commonly overused. A good litmus test is this: **If it is
never `std::move`d, it likely should not be a `std::unique_ptr`.** If we do not
transfer ownership then there is almost always a better way to express our
intent than by using `std::unique_ptr`.

## The Costs of <code>std::unique_ptr</code>

There are several reasons for avoiding `std::unique_ptr` when ownership is not
being transferred.

*   We should aim to use the type that most accurately conveys the required
    semantics. `std::unique_ptr` conveys transferrable ownership which is
    unhelpful if ownership isn't being transferred.
*   `std::unique_ptr` can be in a null state, which gives extra cognitive
    overhead for readers if the null state is not actually used.
*   `std::unique_ptr<T>` manages a heap-allocated `T`, which comes with
    performance implications both due to the heap allocation itself, and the
    fact that the data is spread out across the heap and less likely to be in
    CPU cache.

## Common Anti-Pattern: Avoiding <code>&</code>

It is not uncommon to see examples like the following.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
int ComputeValue() {
  auto data = absl::make_unique&lt;Data&gt;();
  ModifiesData(data.get());
  return data-&gt;GetValue();
}
</pre>

In this example `data` does not need to be a `std::unique_ptr`, because
ownership is never transferred. The data will be constructed and destroyed
exactly at the same instances as if a `Data` object were declared on the stack.
Therefore, as is also discussed in [Tip #123](/tips/123), a better option would
be:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
int ComputeValue() {
  Data data;
  ModifiesData(&data);
  return data.GetValue();
}
</pre>

## Common Anti-Pattern: Delayed Initialization

Because `std::unique_ptr` is null when default constructed, and can be assigned
a new value from `absl::make_unique`, it's common to see `std::unique_ptr` used
as a delayed initialization mechanism. There is a particularly common pattern
with GoogleTest, in which test fixtures can initialize objects in `SetUp`.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
class MyTest : public testing::Test {
 public:
  void SetUp() override {
    thing_ = absl::make_unique&lt;Thing&gt;(data_);
  }

 protected:
  Data data_;
  // Initialized in `SetUp()`, so we're using `std::unique_ptr` as a
  // delayed-initialization mechanism.
  std::unique_ptr&lt;Thing&gt; thing_;
};
</pre>

Once again, we see that ownership of `thing_` is never transferred elsewhere, so
there is no need to use `std::unique_ptr`. The example above could have done all
of the initialization in the default constructor for `MyTest`. See the
[GoogleTest FAQ](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googletest/docs/faq.md#CtorVsSetUp)
for details on `SetUp` versus construction.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class MyTest : public testing::Test {
 public:
  MyTest() : thing_(data_) {}

 private:
  Data data_;
  Thing thing_;
};
</pre>

In this example, `data_` is default constructed as it was before. Afterwards,
`Thing` is constructed with `data_`. Remember that a class's constructor
initializes fields in the order they are declared, so this approach initializes
objects in the same order as they were before, but without the use of
`std::unique_ptr`.

If delayed initialization is really important and unavoidable, consider using
`absl::optional` with its `emplace()` method. [Tip #123](/tips/123) discusses
delayed initialization in much greater depth.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class MyTest : public testing::Test {
 public:
  MyTest() {
    Initialize(&data_);
    thing_.emplace(data_);
  }

 private:
  Data data_;
  absl::optional&lt;Thing&gt; thing_;
};
</pre>

## Caveats

This being C++, there are of course cases where a `std::unique_ptr` makes sense
even if it is never moved. However these situations are uncommon, and any code
handling such situations should come with comments explaining the subtleties.
Here are two such examples.

### Large, rarely used objects.

If an object is only sometimes needed, `absl::optional` is a good default
choice. However, `absl::optional` reserves space regardless of whether the
object is actually constructed. If this space is important, it may make sense to
hold a `std::unique_ptr` and only allocate it if it is needed.

## Legacy APIs

Many legacy APIs return raw pointers to owned data. These APIs often predate the
addition of `std::unique_ptr` to the C++ standard library, and this pattern
should not be copied in new code. However, even if the resulting object is never
moved, such legacy API calls should be wrapped in a `std::unique_ptr` to ensure
that the memory is not leaked.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
Widget *CreateLegacyWidget() { return new Widget; }

int func() {
  Widget *w = CreateLegacyWidget();
  return w-&gt;num_gadgets();
}  // Memory leak!
</pre>

Wrapping the object in a `std::unique_ptr` solves both of these issues:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
int func() {
  std::unique_ptr&lt;Widget&gt; w(CreateLegacyWidget());
  return w-&gt;num_gadgets();
}  // `w` is properly destroyed.
</pre>

[^unique]: The word "unique" in the name `std::unique_ptr` was chosen to signify
    the idea that no other `std::unique_ptr` should be holding the same
    non-null value. That is, at any moment during program execution,
    amongst all the `std::unique_ptr`s that are not null, the addresses
    held by all the `std::unique_ptr`s are unique.
