---
title: "Tip of the Week #188: Be Careful With Smart-Pointer Function Parameters"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/188
type: markdown
order: "188"
---

Originally posted as TotW #188 on December 10, 2020

*By [Krzysztof Kosiński](mailto:krzysio@google.com)*

Updated 2020-12-10

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/188](https://abseil.io/tips/188)


What is wrong with this code?

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
bool CanYouPetTheDog(const std::shared_ptr&lt;Dog&gt;& dog,
                     absl::Duration min_delay) {
  return dog-&gt;GetLastPetTime() + min_delay &lt; absl::Now();
}
</pre>

The function `CanYouPetTheDog` does not affect the ownership of its `dog`
argument, yet its signature demands that it should be stored in a
`std::shared_ptr`. This creates an unnecessary dependency on a specific
ownership model, even though nothing in the function requires it. This
dependency prevents callers from using other models, such as `std::unique_ptr`
or constructing objects on the stack.

## Use References or Pointers When Ownership is Unaffected

By using a reference, we can remove the dependency on a specific ownership
model, and allow our function to work with any object of type `Dog`.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
bool CanYouPetTheDog(const Dog& dog, absl::Duration min_delay) {
  return dog.GetLastPetTime() + min_delay &lt; absl::Now();
}
</pre>

With the above definition, the function can be called regardless of the caller's
ownership model:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
Dog stack_dog;
if (CanYouPetTheDog(stack_dog, delay)) { ... }

auto heap_dog = std::make_unique&lt;Dog&gt;();
if (CanYouPetTheDog(*heap_dog, delay)) { ... }

CustomPetPtr&lt;Dog&gt; custom_dog = CreateDog();
if (CanYouPetTheDog(*custom_dog, delay)) { ... }
</pre>

If the function modifies the passed value, pass a mutable reference or a raw
pointer, and use the same idioms as shown above.

## Use Smart Pointers When the Function Modifies Ownership

The following code provides several overloads for different smart pointer
parameters. The first overload assumes ownership of the passed object and the
second one adds a shared reference to the passed object. Both of these
operations depend on how the caller handles ownership of the `Dog`. Adopting a
`Dog` that lives on the stack isn't possible, as ownership can't be taken away
from the stack.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class Human {
 public:
  ...
  // Transfers ownership of `dog` to this Human.
  // See Tip #117 for the rationale for accepting std::unique_ptr by value.
  void Adopt(std::unique_ptr&lt;Dog&gt; dog) {
    pets_.push_back(std::move(dog));
  }
  // Adds a shared reference to `cat`.
  void Adopt(std::shared_ptr&lt;Cat&gt; cat) {
    pets_.push_back(std::move(cat));
  }

 private:
  std::vector&lt;std::shared_ptr&lt;Pet&gt;&gt; pets_;
  ...
};
</pre>

## Conclusion

If ownership is not being transferred or modified, avoid having smart pointers
as function parameters.

## See Also

-   [Tip #117](/tips/117)
-   [C++ Core Guideline F.7](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#f7-for-general-use-take-t-or-t-arguments-rather-than-smart-pointers)
-   [C++ Core Guideline R.30](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#r30-take-smart-pointers-as-parameters-only-to-explicitly-express-lifetime-semantics)
-   [Herb Sutter's Guru of the Week #91](https://herbsutter.com/2013/06/05/gotw-91-solution-smart-pointer-parameters/)
