---
title: "Tip of the Week #181: Accessing the value of a StatusOr&lt;T&gt;"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/181
type: markdown
order: "181"
---

Originally posted as TotW #181 on July 9, 2020

*By [Michael Sheely](mailto:msheely@google.com)*

Updated 2020-09-02

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/181](https://abseil.io/tips/181)


> `StatusOr<Readability>`: you don't have to choose!

When the time comes to access the value inside an `absl::StatusOr<T>` object, we
should strive to make that access _safe_, _clear_, and _efficient_.

## Recommendation

Accessing the value held by a `StatusOr` should be performed via `operator*` or
`operator->`, after a call to `ok()` has verified that the value is present.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// The same pattern used when handling a unique_ptr...
std::unique_ptr&lt;Foo&gt; foo = TryAllocateFoo();
if (foo != nullptr) {
  foo-&gt;DoBar();  // use the value object
}

// ...or an optional value...
absl::optional&lt;Foo&gt; foo = MaybeFindFoo();
if (foo.has_value()) {
  foo-&gt;DoBar();
}

// ...is also ideal for handling a StatusOr.
absl::StatusOr&lt;Foo&gt; foo = TryCreateFoo();
if (foo.ok()) {
  foo-&gt;DoBar();
}
</pre>

You can limit the scope of a `StatusOr` by declaring it in the initializer of
the `if` statement and checking `ok()` in the condition. If using a `StatusOr`
immediately, you generally *should* limit scope in this way (see
[Tip #165](/tips/165)):

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
if (absl::StatusOr&lt;Foo&gt; foo = TryCreateFoo(); foo.ok()) {
  foo-&gt;DoBar();
}
</pre>

## Background on <code>StatusOr</code>

The `absl::StatusOr<T>` class is a
[tagged union](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tagged_union) with
[value semantics](https://isocpp.org/wiki/faq/value-vs-ref-semantics) indicating
exactly one of the following situations:

*   an object of type `T` is available,
*   an `absl::Status` error (`!ok()`) indicating why the value is not present.

You can read more about `absl::Status` and `absl::StatusOr` in
[Tip #76](/tips/76).

## Safety, Clarity, and Efficiency

Treating the `StatusOr` object as one would treat a smart pointer helps code
achieve clarity while remaining safe and efficient. Below, we will consider some
of the other ways you might have seen a `StatusOr` accessed, and why we prefer
the approach using the indirection operators.

### Alternative Value Accessor Safety Issues

What about `absl::StatusOr<T>::value()`?

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
absl::StatusOr&lt;Foo&gt; foo = TryCreateFoo();
foo.value();  // Behavior depends on the build mode.
</pre>

Here, the behavior depends on the build mode -- in particular, whether the code
was compiled with exceptions enabled.[^1] As such, it is not clear to readers if
an error status will terminate the program.

The `value()` method combines two actions: a test for validity followed by an
access of the value. It should therefore be used _only if_ both actions are
intended (and even then, think twice and consider that its behavior depends on
the build mode). If the status is already known to be `OK`, then your ideal
accessor has semantics of simply accessing the value, which is exactly what
`operator*` and `operator->` provide. In addition to making the code more
precisely indicate your intent, the access will be at least as efficient as
`value()`'s contract to test for validity and then access the value.

### Avoiding Multiple Names for the Same Object

Treating `absl::StatusOr` objects as we would a smart pointer or `optional`
value also allows us to avoid the conceptually awkward situation of having two
variables referring to the same value. It also avoids the naming dilemmas and
`auto` overuse which come with this territory.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
// Without digging up the declaration of TryCreateFoo(), a reader will not
// immediately understand the types here (optional? pointer? StatusOr?).
auto maybe_foo = TryCreateFoo();
// ...compounded by the use of implicit bool rather than `.ok()`.
if (!maybe_foo) { /* handle foo not present */ }
// Now two variables (maybe_foo, foo) represent the same value.
Foo& foo = maybe_foo.value();
</pre>

### Avoiding the <code>_or</code> Suffix

Another benefit of using a `StatusOr` variable's intrinsic value type after
checking for validity (rather than creating multiple variables for the same
value) is that we can use the best name for the `StatusOr` without the need (or
temptation!) to add a prefix or suffix.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
// The type already describes that this is a unique_ptr; `foo` would be fine.
std::unique_ptr&lt;Foo&gt; foo_ptr;

absl::StatusOr&lt;Foo&gt; foo_or = MaybeFoo();
if (foo_or.ok()) {
  const Foo& foo = foo_or.value();
  foo.DoBar();
}
</pre>

If there is only one variable, we can avoid the suffix, and simply name the
variable after its underlying value (as we do with pointers).

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
absl::StatusOr&lt;Foo&gt; foo = MaybeFoo();
if (foo.ok()) {
  MakeUseOf(*foo);
  foo-&gt;DoBar();
}
</pre>

## Solution

Testing the `absl::StatusOr` object for validity (as you would a smart pointer
or `optional`) and accessing it using `operator*` or `operator->` is readable,
efficient, and safe.

It helps you avoid the potential pitfalls of naming ambiguity mentioned above,
and does it all without the use of any macros.

Code that accesses values via `operator*` or `operator->` (whether using a
pointer, a `StatusOr`, an `optional`, or otherwise), should always verify that
the code has first verified that the value is present. This validation should be
close to where the value is accessed.

[^1]: Per the
    [documentation](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/status/statusor.h)
    of the `value()` function, if exceptions are enabled, this will throw
    `absl::BadStatusOrAccess` (which may be caught, meaning the program may
    not terminate). If compiled without exceptions, code will crash . Though
    exceptions are not enabled by default in google3, `StatusOr` will soon be
    made public (where some code will be built with exceptions) and for
    portable code, the best practices at go/exception-safety also recommend
    using constructs which behave reasonably whether or not exceptions are
    enabled.
