---
title: "Tip of the Week #176: Prefer Return Values to Output Parameters"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/176
type: markdown
order: "176"
---

Originally posted as TotW #176 on March 12, 2020

*By [Etienne Dechamps](mailto:edechamps@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/176](https://abseil.io/tips/176)


## The problem

Consider the following:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
// Extracts the foo spec and the bar spec from the provided doodad.
// Returns false if the input is invalid.
bool ExtractSpecs(Doodad doodad, FooSpec* foo_spec, BarSpec* bar_spec);
</pre>

Using (or implementing) this function correctly requires the developer to ask
themselves a surprising number of questions:

-   **Are `foo_spec` and `bar_spec` _out_ or _in/out_ parameters?**
-   **What happens to pre-existing data** in `foo_spec` or `bar_spec`? Is it
    appended to? Is it overwritten? Does it make the function CHECK-fail? Does
    it make it return `false`? Is it undefined behavior?
-   **Can `foo_spec` be null?** Can `bar_spec`? If they cannot, does a null
    pointer make the function CHECK-fail? Does it make it return `false`? Is it
    undefined behavior?
-   **What are the lifetime requirements** on `foo_spec` and `bar_spec`? In
    other words, do they need to outlive the function call?
-   **If `false` is returned**, what happens to `foo_spec` and `bar_spec`? Are
    they guaranteed to be unchanged? Are they "reset" in some way? Is it
    unspecified?

One cannot answer any of these questions from the function signature alone, and
cannot rely on the C++ compiler to enforce these contracts. Function comments
can help, but often don't. This function's documentation, for example, is silent
on most of these issues, and is also ambiguous about what "input" means. Does it
refer only to `doodad`, or to the other parameters too?

Furthermore, this approach inflicts boilerplate on every callsite: the caller
has to allocate `FooSpec` and `BarSpec` objects in advance in order to call the
function.

In this case, there's a simple way to eliminate the boilerplate *and* encode the
contracts in a way that the compiler can enforce.

## The solution

Here's how to make all these questions moot:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct ExtractSpecsResult {
  FooSpec foo_spec;
  BarSpec bar_spec;
};
// Extracts the foo spec and the bar spec from the provided doodad.
// Returns nullopt if the input is invalid.
absl::optional&lt;ExtractSpecsResult&gt; ExtractSpecs(Doodad doodad);
</pre>

This new API is semantically the same, but it is now much harder to misuse:

-   It is clearer what the inputs and outputs are.
-   There are no questions about pre-existing data in `foo_spec` and `bar_spec`
    because they are created from scratch by the function.
-   There are no questions about null pointers because there are no pointers.
-   There are no questions about lifetimes because everything is passed and
    returned by value.
-   There are no questions about what happens to `foo_spec` and `bar_spec` in
    case of failure because they cannot even be accessed if `nullopt` is
    returned.

This in turn reduces the likelihood of bugs and reduces cognitive load on the
developer.

There are other benefits, too. For example the function is more easily
composable; that is, it can easily be used as part of a wider expression, e.g.
`SomeFunction(ExtractSpecs(...))`.

## Caveats

-   This approach doesn't work for in-out parameters.
    -   In some cases it is possible to use a variant of this approach whereby
        the parameter is taken by value, mutated, and then returned by value.
        Whether this is a good idea or not depends on how the function is used
        and whether the value is efficiently movable ([Tip #117](/tips/117)).
-   This approach doesn't let the caller easily customize the creation of the
    returned objects.
    -   For example, if `FooSpec` and `BarSpec` are protos, the out-parameter
        approach lets the caller allocate those protos on a particular arena if
        they wish. In the return-values approach, the arena would need to be
        specified as an additional parameter or the callee would have to know it
        already.
-   Performance might differ depending on which approach you choose and the
    specifics of the situation.
    -   In some cases returning values can be less efficient, for example if it
        leads to repeated allocation in a loop.
    -   In other cases, returning values might be more efficient than you think,
        thanks to (N)RVO ([Tip #11, go/totw/166](/tips/11, go/totw/166)). It
        might even be *more* efficient than output parameters because the
        optimizer doesn't have to worry about aliasing.
    -   As always, avoid premature optimization. Choose the API that makes the
        most sense, and only cater to performance if you have evidence that it
        makes a difference.

## Recommendations

-   **Prefer return values to output parameters** whenever possible. This is
    consistent with the
    [style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Output_Parameters).
-   **Use generic wrappers** like `absl::optional` to represent a missing return
    value. Consider returning `absl::variant`if you need a more flexible
    representation with multiple alternatives.
-   **Use a struct** to return multiple values from a function.
    -   Feel free to write a new struct specifically to represent the return
        value of the function if that makes sense.
    -   [Resist](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Structs_vs._Tuples)
        the temptation to use `std::pair` or `std::tuple` for this purpose.
