---
title: "Tip of the Week #163: Passing <code>std::optional</code> parameters"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/163
type: markdown
order: "163"
---

Originally posted as TotW #163 on July 11, 2019

*By [Ian Eldred Pudney](mailto:puddles@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/163](https://abseil.io/tips/163)


*Are nulls really a billion-dollar mistake?*

## The problem

Let's say you need to implement a function with a parameter that may or may not
exist. You might be tempted to use modern, fancy-schmancy `std::optional` for
this. However, if the object is big enough that it should be passed by
reference, `std::optional` is probably not what you want. Consider the following
two declarations:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
void MyFunc(const std::optional&lt;Foo&gt;& foo);  // May copy by value
void MyFunc(std::optional&lt;const Foo&&gt; foo);  // Doesn't compile
</pre>

The first option probably doesn't do what you want. If someone passes a
`std::optional<Foo>` into `MyFunc`, it is passed by reference, but if someone
passes a `Foo` into `MyFunc` (for example as a return value), the `Foo` will be
copied *by value* into a temporary `std::optional<Foo>`, which will then be
passed by reference into the function. If your goal was to avoid copying the
`Foo`, you haven't.

The second option would be great, but unfortunately is not supported by
`std::optional`.

## Recommendation

**Avoid function parameters of the form `const std::optional&`.**

If your object is small enough to not need pass-by-reference, you should take
the object wrapped in an `std::optional` by value. For example:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void MyFunc(std::optional&lt;int&gt; bar);
void MyFunc(std::optional&lt;absl::string_view&gt; baz);
</pre>

If you are *intentionally* making a copy of the argument, you should also accept
the `std::optional` by value to make that clear:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void MyFunc(std::optional&lt;Foo&gt; foo);
</pre>

Otherwise, skip the `std::optional` altogether.

You can pass it by `absl::Nullable<const Foo*>` and let `nullptr` indicate "does
not exist."

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void MyFunc(absl::Nullable&lt;const Foo*&gt; foo);
</pre>

This will be just as efficient as passing by `const Foo&`, but supports null
values. See [Tip #116](/tips/116) for more on when to use a pointer instead of a
const reference.

### Then what on Earth is <code>std::optional</code> for???

`std::optional` can be used if you *own* the thing that's optional. For example,
class members and function return values often work well with `std::optional`.

### Exception

If you expect all callers of your function to already have a
`std::optional<Foo>` and never pass in a `Foo`, then you may take a `const
std::optional<Foo>&`. However, this is rare; it usually only occurs if your
function is private within your own file/library.

### What about <code>std::reference_wrapper</code>?

The documentation for `std::optional` points out that you can use a
`std::reference_wrapper` to work around the fact that optional references aren't
supported:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void MyFunc(std::optional&lt;std::reference_wrapper&lt;const Foo&gt;&gt; foo);
</pre>

However, we don't recommend this:

*   `std::reference_wrapper` has surprisingly subtle semantics, making it
    difficult to understand and use safely. For instance, various utilities in
    the standard library special case it in ways that make it act differently
    from a normal value or reference.
*   `std::optional<std::reference_wrapper<const Foo>>` is cumbersome and
    verbose, compared to `absl::Nullable<const Foo*>`.
