---
title: "Tip of the Week #177: Assignability vs. Data Member Types"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/177
type: markdown
order: "177"
---

Originally posted as TotW #177 on April 6, 2020

*By [Titus Winters](mailto:titus@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/177](https://abseil.io/tips/177)


When implementing a type, decide on type design first. Prioritize API over
implementation details. One common example of this is the tradeoff between
assignability of a type vs. qualifiers for data members.

## Deciding how to represent data members

Imagine you are writing a `City` class, and discussing how to represent its
member variables. You know that it is short-lived, representing the city as a
snapshot in time, so things like population, name, and mayor could conceivably
be `const` - we aren't going to use the same object in a given program for years
and years, so we don't need to account for changes in population, new census
results, or elections.

Should we have members like this?

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
 private:
  const std::string city_name_;
  const Person mayor_;
  const int64 population_;
</pre>

Why or why not?

The common suggestion for "Yes, make those `const`" hinges on the idea "Well,
those values aren't going to change for a given `City`, so since everything that
can be `const` should be `const`, make them `const`." That will make it easier
for maintainers of the class to avoid accidentally modifying those fields.

This misses a critically important concern: what sort of type is `City`? Is this
a value? Or a bundle of business logic? Is it expected to be copyable,
move-only, or non-copyable? The set of operations you can write efficiently for
`City` (as a whole) may be impacted by the question of whether a single member
is made `const`, and that is often a bad tradeoff.

Specifically, if your class has `const` members, it cannot be assigned to
(whether by copy-assignment or move-assignment). The language understands this:
if your type has a `const` member, copy-assignment and move-assignment operators
will not be synthesized. You can still copy (or move) *construct* such an
object, but you cannot change it in any way after construction (even "just" to
copy from another object of the same type). Even if you write your own
assignment operators, you'll quickly find that you (obviously) can't overwrite
these `const` members.

So it is possible that the question becomes "Which should we prefer: `const`
members or assignment operations?" However, even that is misleading, because
both are answered by the one *important* question, "What sort of type is
`City`?" If it is intended to be a *value type*, that specifies the API
(including assignment operations), and API trumps implementation concern in
general.

It is important for those API design decisions to take priority over
implementation-detail choices: in the general case, there are more engineers
affected by the API of a type than implementation of a type. That is, there are
more users of a type than maintainers of that type, so priority should go to
design choices that affect the user above the implementer. Even if you think the
type will never be used by anyone outside of the team that is maintaining it,
software engineering is about interface design and abstraction - we should be
prioritizing good interfaces.

## Reference Members

The same reasoning applies to storing references as data members. Even if we
know that the member must be non-null, it is still usually preferable to store
`T*` for value types, because references are not rebindable. That is, we cannot
re-point a `T&` - any modifications of such a member are modifying the
underlying `T`.

Consider the implementation of `std::vector<T>`. There will almost certainly be
a `T* data` member in any `std::vector` implementation, pointing to the
allocation. We know from the specification of `std::vector` that such an
allocation must usually be valid (except possibly for empty vectors). An
implementation that always has an allocation could make that `T&`, right? (Yes,
I'm ignoring arrays and offsets here.)

Clearly not. `std::vector` is a value type, it is copyable and assignable. If
the allocation was stored with a reference-to-the-first-member instead of
pointer-to-the-first-member, we wouldn't be able to move-assign the storage, and
it's unclear how we'd update `data` when resizing normally. Our clever way of
telling other maintainers "This value is non-null" would be getting in the way
of providing users the desired API. Hopefully it is clear that this is the wrong
tradeoff.

## Non-copyable / assignable types

Of course, if your choices about type design suggest that `City` (or whatever
type you are thinking about) should be non-copyable, that leaves far fewer
constraints on your implementation. It isn't *right* or *wrong* for a class to
hold `const` or reference members, it's only a concern when those implementation
decisions are constraining or corrupting the interface presented by that class.
If you've already made a thoughtful and conscious decision that your type need
not be copyable, it's very reasonable for you to make different choices about
how to represent the data members of the class. (But see [Tip #116](/tips/116)
for some more thoughts and pitfalls around argument lifetime and reference
storage).

## The Unusual Case: immutable types

There is one useful-but-unusual design that may *mandate* `const` members:
intentionally immutable types. Instances of such a type are immutable after
construction: no mutating methods, no assignment operators. These are fairly
rare, but can sometimes be useful. In particular, such a type is inherently
*thread-safe* because there are no mutating operations. Objects of such a type
can be freely shared among threads with no concern about data races or
synchronization. However, in exchange these objects may have significant
run-time overhead stemming from the need to copy them constantly. The
immutability even prevents these objects from being efficiently moved.

It is almost always preferable to design your type to be mutable but still
thread-compatible, rather than relying on thread-safety-via-immutability. Users
of your type are usually in a better position to judge the benefits of
mutability case-by-case. Don't force them to work around unusual design choices
without very strong evidence showing why your use case is unusual.

## Recommendations

*   Decide on the design of your type before considering implementation details.
*   Value types are common and recommended. So are business-logic types, which
    are often non-copyable.
*   Immutable types are sometimes useful, but the cases where they are justified
    are fairly rare.
*   Prioritize API design and the needs of users over the (usually smaller)
    concerns of maintainers.
*   Avoid `const` and reference data members when building value types or
    move-only types.
