---
title: "Tip of the Week #76: Use absl::Status"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/76
type: markdown
order: "076"
---

Originally posted as TotW #76 on May 4, 2014

*By [Titus Winters](mailto:titus@google.com)*

Updated 2020-02-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/76](https://abseil.io/tips/76)


Some folks have questions about when and how to use `absl::Status`, so here are
a few reasons why you ought to use `Status`, and some things to keep in mind
when using it.

## Communicate Intent and Force the Caller to Handle Errors

Use `Status` to force the caller to handle the possibility of errors. Since June
2013, a function returning an `Status` object cannot simply be ignored. That is,
this code produces a compilation error:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
absl::Status Foo();

void CallFoo1() {
  Foo();
}
</pre>

Whereas these calls are fine:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void CallFoo2() {
  Foo().IgnoreError();
}

void CallFoo3() {
  if (!status.ok()) std::abort();
}

void CallFoo4() {
  absl::Status status = Foo();
  if (!status.ok()) std::cerr &lt;&lt; status;
}
</pre>

Why is it OK for `Status` to have an `IgnoreError()` method, while we just went
through all this effort to make the compiler check that `Status` isn’t ignored?
Imagine you’re the code reviewer looking at either `CallFoo1()` or `CallFoo2()`.
The latter code snippets make the reviewer think "This function could have had
an error, but the author thinks its OK to ignore it. Is it?" `CallFoo1()` does
not trigger such a response.

## Allow the Caller to Handle Errors Where They Have More Context

Use `Status` when it’s not clear in your code how to handle the error. Instead,
return a `Status`, and let the caller, who may have more appropriate insight,
handle the error.

For example, logging locally might impact performance, such as when writing
infrastructure code. If your code is called in a tight loop, even a call to
`std::cout` may be too expensive. In other cases, users may not really care if a
call succeeds, and find the log spam intrusive.

Logging is appropriate in many cases, but functions that return `Status` don’t
need to `LOG` to explain why something failed: they can return the failure code
and error string and let the caller decide what the right error handling
response should be.

## Isn’t This Just Re-Inventing Exceptions?

The Google style guide famously prohibits exceptions (it’s discussed more than
any other prohibition). It can be tempting to view `absl::Status` as a poor-
man’s exception mechanism, with a lot more overhead. While there may be
similarities on the surface, `absl::Status` differs in its need to be explicitly
handled, rather than just passed up the stack invisibly as an unhandled
exception. It forces engineers to decide how to handle errors, and explicitly
documents that in compilable code. And finally, returning an error using a
`absl::Status` is orders of magnitude faster than throwing and catching an
exception. These features may seem onerous when writing code, but the result is
a net win for everyone that has to read that code, and for Google as a whole.

## Conclusion

Error handling is one of the easiest things to get wrong: these are inherently
the edge cases. A utility like `Status` that adds consistency to error handling
across API boundaries, projects, processes, and languages helps us minimize a
large class of "There were issues with our error handling" bugs. If you’re
designing an interface that needs to express the possibility of failure, please
use `Status` if you don’t have a pretty strong reason to do otherwise.
