---
title: "Tip of the Week #172: Designated Initializers"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/172
type: markdown
order: "172"
---

Originally posted as TotW #172 on December 11, 2019

*By [Aaron Jacobs](mailto:jacobsa@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/172](https://abseil.io/tips/172)


[Designated initializers](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/aggregate_initialization#Designated_initializers)
are a syntax in the draft C++20 standard for specifying the contents of a struct
in a compact yet readable and maintainable manner. Instead of the repetitive

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct Point {
  double x;
  double y;
  double z;
};

Point point;
point.x = 3.0;
point.y = 4.0;
point.z = 5.0;
</pre>

one can use designated initializers to write

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
Point point = {
    .x = 3.0,
    .y = 4.0,
    .z = 5.0,
};
</pre>

This is a little less repetitive, but more importantly, can be used in more
contexts. For example, it means the struct can be made `const` without resorting
to awkward workarounds:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// Make it clear to the reader (of the potentially complicated larger piece of
// code) that this struct will never change.
const Point character_position = { .x = 3.0 };
</pre>

Or can be used directly in a function call without introducing an additional
identifier into the scope:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::vector&lt;Point&gt; points;
[...]
points.push_back(Point{.x = 3.0, .y = 3.0});
points.push_back(Point{.x = 4.0, .y = 4.0});
</pre>

## Semantics

Designated initializers are a form of
[aggregate initialization][aggregate-initialization], and so can be used only
with [aggregates][]. This means approximately "structs or classes with no
user-provided constructors or virtual functions", which in turn is approximately
what we use `struct` (as opposed to `class`) in typical Google style.

[aggregate-initialization]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/aggregate_initialization
[aggregates]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/aggregate_initialization#Explanation

The semantics of C++20 designated initializers are what you might expect given
other C++ language features like member initialization lists in constructors.
Explicitly mentioned fields are initialized, in order, with the expression
provided, and it is permissible to leave out fields that you want to have
"default" behavior for:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
Point point = {
    .x = 1.0,
    // y will be 0.0
    .z = 2.0,
};
</pre>

What does "default" mean above? Outside of special cases like `union`s the
answer is:

*   If the struct definition contains a default member initializer (i.e. the
    field definition looks like `std::string foo = "default value";`) then that
    is used.
*   Otherwise the field is initialized as if with `= {}`. In practice this means
    that for plain old data types you get the zero value, and for more
    complicated classes you get a default-constructed instance.

This is typically the least surprising behavior. See the
[standard](http://eel.is/c++draft/dcl.init#aggr-5) for details.

## Some History and Language Trivia

Designated initializers have been a standard part of the C language since C99,
and have been offered by compilers as a
[non-standard extension](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Designated-Inits.html)
since before that. But until recently they were not part of C++: a notable
example where C is not a subset of C++. For this reason the Google style guide
<!-- totw:google3(cl number) -->
[used to say not to use them](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html?cl=282453546#Nonstandard_Extensions).
<!-- totw:oss-replace with [used to say not to use them](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Nonstandard_Extensions). -->

After two decades the situation has finally changed: designated initializers are
now [part](http://eel.is/c++draft/dcl.init#aggr-3) of the draft C++20 standard.

The C++20 form of designated initializers has some restrictions compared to the
C version:

*   C++20 requires fields to be listed in the designator in the same order as
    they are listed in the struct definition (so `Point{.y = 1.0, .x = 2.0}` is
    not legal). C does not require this.
*   C allows you to mix designated and non-designated initializers (`Point{1.0,
    .z = 2.0}`), but C++20 does not.
*   C supports a syntax for sparsely initializing arrays known as "array
    designators". This is not part of C++20.
