---
title: "Tip of the Week #173: Wrapping Arguments in Option Structs"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/173
type: markdown
order: "173"
---

Originally posted as TotW #173 on December 19, 2019

*By [John Bandela](mailto:jbandela@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/173](https://abseil.io/tips/173)


*It came without packages, boxes or bags. And he puzzled and puzzled 'till his
puzzler was sore.*

*-Dr. Seuss*

## Designated Initializers

Designated initializers are a C++20 feature that is available in most compilers
today. Designated initializers make using option structs easier and safer since
we can construct the options object in the call to the function. This results in
shorter code and avoids a lot of temporary lifetime issues with option structs.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct PrintDoubleOptions {
  absl::string_view prefix = "";
  int precision = 8;
  char thousands_separator = ',';
  char decimal_separator = '.';
  bool scientific = false;
};

void PrintDouble(double value,
                 const PrintDoubleOptions& options = PrintDoubleOptions{});

std::string name = "my_value";
PrintDouble(5.0, {.prefix = absl::StrCat(name, "="), .scientific = true});
</pre>

For more background on why option structs are helpful and the potential pitfalls
in using them that designated initializers help avoid, read on.

## The Problem of Passing Many Arguments

Functions that take many arguments can be confusing. To illustrate, let us
consider this function for printing out a floating point value.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void PrintDouble(double value, absl::string_view prefix,  int precision,
                 char thousands_separator, char decimal_separator,
                 bool scientific);

</pre>

This function provides us a lot of flexibility because it takes so many options.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
PrintDouble(5.0, "my_value=", 2, ',', '.', false);
</pre>

The above code will print out: "my_value=5.00".

However, it is hard to read this code and know to which parameter each argument
corresponds. For instance, here we have inadvertently mixed up the order of our
`precision` and `thousands_separator`.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
PrintDouble(5.0, "my_value=", ',', '.', 2, false);
</pre>

Historically, we have used
[argument comments](http://clang.llvm.org/extra/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone-argument-comment.html)
to clarify argument meanings at call sites to reduce this sort of ambiguity. The
addition of argument comments to the above example would allow ClangTidy to
detect the error:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
PrintDouble(5.0, "my_value=",
            /*precision=*/2,
            /*thousands_separator=*/',',
            /*decimal_separator=*/'.',
            /*scientific=*/false);
</pre>

However, argument comments still have several drawbacks:

*   No enforcement: ClangTidy warnings are not caught at buildtime. Subtle
    errors (e.g. a missing `=` sign) can disable the check entirely with no
    warning, providing a false sense of security.
*   Availability: not all projects and platforms support ClangTidy.

No matter whether your arguments are commented or not, specifying lots of
options can also be tedious. Many times there are sensible defaults for the
options. To address this concern, we can add defaults to the parameters.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void PrintDouble(double value, absl::string_view prefix = "", int precision = 8,
                 char thousands_separator = ',', char decimal_separator = '.',
                 bool scientific = false);
</pre>

Now we can call `PrintDouble` with less boilerplate.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
PrintDouble(5.0, "my_value=");

</pre>

However, if we want to specify a non-default argument for `scientific`, we would
still be forced to specify values for all of the parameters that come before it:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
PrintDouble(5.0, "my_value=",
            /*precision=*/8,              // unchanged from default
            /*thousands_separator=*/',',  // unchanged from default
            /*decimal_separator=*/'.',    // unchanged from default
            /*scientific=*/true);
</pre>

We can address all of these issues by grouping all of the options together in an
*option struct*:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct PrintDoubleOptions {
  absl::string_view prefix = "";
  int precision = 8;
  char thousands_separator = ',';
  char decimal_separator = '.';
  bool scientific = false;
};

void PrintDouble(double value,
                 const PrintDoubleOptions& options = PrintDoubleOptions{});
</pre>

Now we can have names for our values, as well as flexibly use defaults.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
PrintDoubleOptions options;
options.prefix = "my_value=";
PrintDouble(5.0, options);
</pre>

## Caveats

There are some issues with this solution, though. First is that we now have some
extra boilerplate in passing options, though that's often a minor cost compared
to the benefits. But there are a few more things to consider.

### Lifetime of Temporaries

For example, when we took all the options as parameters the following code was
safe:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::string name = "my_value";
PrintDouble(5.0, absl::StrCat(name, "="));

</pre>

In the code above, we are creating a temporary `string` and binding a
`string_view` to that. The temporary lifetime is the duration of the function
call so we are safe, but using an options struct in the same manner, results in
a dangling `string_view`.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
std::string name = "my_value";
PrintDoubleOptions options;
options.prefix = absl::StrCat(name, "=");
PrintDouble(5.0, options);
</pre>

There are two ways we can fix this. The first is to simply change the type of
`prefix` from `string_view` to `string`. The downside of doing this is that now
the option struct is less efficient than directly passing the arguments. The
other way that we can fix this is to add setter member functions.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class PrintDoubleOptions {
 public:
  PrintDoubleOptions& set_prefix(absl::string_view prefix) {
    prefix_ = prefix;
    return *this;
  }

  absl::string_view prefix() const { return prefix_; }

  // Setters and getters for the other member variables.

 private:
  absl::string_view prefix_ = "";
  int precision_ = 8;
  char thousands_separator_ = ',';
  char decimal_separator_ = '.';
  bool scientific_ = false;
};
</pre>

This can then be used to set the variables in the call.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::string name = "my_value";
PrintDouble(5.0, PrintDoubleOptions{}.set_prefix(absl::StrCat(name, "=")));
</pre>

As you can see, the cost is that our option struct became a more complicated
class with a lot more boilerplate.

The simpler alternative is to use
[designated initializers](#designated-initializers) as shown at the top.

### Type Deduction

Designated initializers are often used with
[copy list initialization](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/list_initialization#Copy-list-initialization),
where a brace-enclosed list of initializers doesn't have an explicit type
specified nearby.

When directly passing options to a function with the option struct as a
parameter, the braced list is immediately turned into an argument of the
specific type. So, this works well:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
PrintDouble(5.0, {.scientific=true})
</pre>

But in a function like `std::make_unique` that uses "perfect forwarding", where
the type of the parameter must be deduced, the braced list's type cannot be
found. So, this does not work:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
class DoublePrinter {
  explicit DoublePrinter(const PrintDoubleOptions& options);
  ...
};

auto printer1 = std::make_unique&lt;DoublePrinter&gt;({.scientific=true});
</pre>

The caller must name the option struct's type, or there must be a helper factory
function that does so.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class DoublePrinter {
  static std::unique_ptr&lt;DoublePrinter&gt; Make(const PrintDoubleOptions& options);
  explicit DoublePrinter(const PrintDoubleOptions& options);
};

auto printer1 = std::make_unique&lt;DoublePrinter&gt;(
    PrintDoubleOptions{.scientific=true});
auto printer2 = DoublePrinter::Make({.scientific=true});
</pre>

### Default Values in a Nested Type

If an option struct is associated with a class, it's often reasonable to nest
the struct within the class.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class DoublePrinter {
  struct Options {
    int precision = 8;
    ...
  };

  explicit DoublePrinter(const Options& options);

  static std::unique_ptr&lt;DoublePrinter&gt; Make(const Options& options);
};
</pre>

But then if you need to allow the option struct to be skipped entirely, such as
when it's being added to an existing class, and the nested struct has a default
member initializer (the `= 8` after the field name `precision`, for example),
you cannot use have a
[default argument](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Default_Arguments)
whose value leaves the field implicit.

In this case, provide another overload instead of using a default argument.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class DoublePrinter {
  struct Options {
    int precision = 8;
    ...
  };

  static std::unique_ptr&lt;DoublePrinter&gt; Make() { return Make({}); }
  static std::unique_ptr&lt;DoublePrinter&gt; Make(const Options& options);

  explicit DoublePrinter() : DoublePrinter({}) {}
  explicit DoublePrinter(const Options& options);

  // Cannot do this:
  //   static std::unique_ptr&lt;DoublePrinter&gt; Make(const Options& options = {});
  //   explicit DoublePrinter(const Options& options = {});
};
</pre>

## Conclusions

1.  For functions which take multiple arguments which may be confused by the
    caller or where you want to specify default arguments without having to
    worry about the order, strongly consider using option structs to increase
    both convenience and code clarity.

2.  When calling functions that take option structs, using designated
    initializers can result in shorter code as well as potentially avoiding
    temporary lifetime issues.

3.  Designated initializers by virtue of their conciseness and clarity further
    tip the balance towards preferring functions that take option structs over
    those that have many parameters.
