---
title: "Tip of the Week #171: Avoid Sentinel Values"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/171
type: markdown
order: "171"
---

Originally posted as TotW #171 on November 8, 2019

*By [Hyrum Wright](mailto:hwright@google.com)*

Updated 2020-04-06

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/171](https://abseil.io/tips/171)


[Sentinel values](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sentinel_value) are values that
have special meaning in a specific context. For example, consider the following
API:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
// Returns the account balance, or -5 if the account has been closed.
int AccountBalance();
</pre>

Every value of `int` is documented to be a valid return value for
`AccountBalance`, except for `-5`. Intuitively, this feels a bit odd: should
callers only check against `-5` specificially, or is any negative value a
reliable "account closed" signal? What happens when the system supports negative
balances and the API needs to be adjusted to return negative values?

Using sentinel values increases the complexity of the calling code. If the
caller is rigorous, it explicitly checks against the sentinel value:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
int balance = AccountBalance();
if (balance == -5) {
  std::cerr &lt;&lt; "account closed";
  return;
}
// use `balance` here
</pre>

Some callers may check against a broader range of values than is specified:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
int balance = AccountBalance();
if (balance &lt;= 0) {
  std::cerr &lt;&lt; "where is my account?";
  return;
}
// use `balance` here
</pre>

And some callers may just ignore the sentinel value altogether, assuming that it
doesn't actually occur in practice:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
int balance = AccountBalance();
// use `balance` here
</pre>

## Problems with Sentinel Values

The above example illustrates some of the common problems with using sentinel
values. Others include:

*   Different systems may use different sentinel values, such as a single
    negative value, all negative values, an infinite value, or any arbitrary
    value. The only way to communicate the special value is through
    documentation.
*   The sentinel values are still part of the type's domain of valid values, so
    neither the caller nor the callee is forced by the type system to
    acknowledge that a value may be invalid. When code and comments disagree,
    both are usually wrong.
*   Sentinel values limit interface evolution, as the specific sentinel may
    someday be a valid value for use in that system.
*   One system's sentinel value is another's valid value, increasing cognitive
    overhead and code complexity when interfacing with multiple systems.

Forgetting to check for specified sentinel values is a common bug. In the best
case, the use of an unchecked sentinel value will immediately crash the system
during runtime. More frequently, an unchecked sentinel value may continue to
propagate through the system, producing bad results as it goes.

## Use <code>absl::optional</code> Instead

Use `absl::optional` to indicate unavailable or invalid information instead of
using special values.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// Returns the account balance, or absl::nullopt if the account has been closed.
absl::optional&lt;int&gt; AccountBalance();
</pre>

The caller of our new version of `AccountBalance()` now must explicitly look
inside the returned value for a potential balance, signalling that the result
might be invalid in the process. Barring additional documentation, the caller
can assume that any valid `int` value can be returned from this function,
without excluding specific sentinel values. This simplification clarifies the
intent of calling code.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
absl::optional&lt;int&gt; balance = AccountBalance();

if (!balance.has_value()) {
  std::cerr &lt;&lt; "Account doesn't exist";
  return;
}
// use `*balance` here
</pre>

Next time you are tempted to use a sentinel value within your system, strongly
consider using an appropriate `absl::optional` instead.

## See Also

*   For more information about using `absl::optional` to pass values as
    parameters, see [TotW #163](163).
*   For help deciding when to use `absl::optional` instead of `std::unique_ptr`,
    see [TotW #123](123).
