---
title: "Tip of the Week #124: <code>absl::StrFormat()</code>"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/124
type: markdown
order: "124"
---

Originally posted as TotW #124 on October 11, 2016



Updated 2022-11-16

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/124](https://abseil.io/tips/124)


## The <code>str_format</code> Library and <code>absl::StrFormat()</code>

After a long testing and development period, we're pleased to announce that the
`str_format` library is now generally available. The `str_format` library is a
very efficient, typesafe, and extensible library that implements all `printf`
formatting syntax. Nearly all `printf`-style conversions can be trivially
upgraded to `absl::StrFormat()`. For more detailed documentation, see
https://abseil.io/docs/cpp/guides/format. It's the best option for printf-style
formatting, but no position is taken here on where printf-style is or isn't
appropriate.

Usage is simple. Add a BUILD dependency on
`//third_party/absl/strings:str_format`, and include the header:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
#include "absl/strings/str_format.h"
</pre>

Most users will interact with the `str_format` library simply by calling
`absl::StrFormat()` just as they'd call `StringPrintf()` or
`util::format::StringF()` in the past. There are also `StrAppendFormat()` and
`StreamFormat()` variants.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::string s = absl::StrFormat("%d %s\n", 123, "hello");
</pre>

Unlike the C library's `printf()`, the correctness of `absl::StrFormat()`
conversions doesn't rely on callers encoding the exact types of arguments into
the format string. With `printf()` this must be carefully done with length
modifiers and conversion specifiers, such as `%llu` encoding the type `unsigned
long long`. But `absl::StrFormat()` is written in C++, so it uses templates and
overloading to safely work directly with types in the caller's argument list. In
`absl::StrFormat()`, a format conversion specifies a broader C++ conceptual
category instead of an exact type. For example, `%s` binds to any string-like
argument, so `std::string`, `absl::string_view`, `Cord`, and `const char*` are
all accepted. Likewise, `%d` accepts an integer-like argument, etc. It can be
further extended for basic user-defined types (though we'd like to manage the
extensions for now). It ignores length modifiers like `ll` and formats any
usable value. For example, clients do not have to unnecessarily hardcode the
types of the data members of `x` here:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
  X x = project_x::GetStats();
  std::cout &lt;&lt; absl::StreamFormat("%s:%08x", x.name, x.size);
</pre>

The `name` can be anything string-like, and `size` can be any integer-like type.
This decoupling is great for the maintainers of `project_x`.

We can also control the destination much more smoothly with the `str_format`
library. In the `printf()` family, there was `fprintf()` for `FILE*` output,
`sprintf()` for writing to a buffer, `asprintf()` for writing to allocated
memory, or the (now deprecated) usage of `StringPrintf()` (with wasteful
multiple calls to `vsnprintf()`). The `str_format` library uses an abstract
sink, so the destination can be customized without loss of efficiency. As
built-ins, we have `absl::StrFormat()` to produce a new `std::string`,
`absl::StrAppendFormat()` to append to a `std::string`, and
`absl::StreamFormat()` to write to a `std::ostream` (such as for logging).

Under the clang compiler, compile-time checking is performed on literal format
strings. In the uncommon case of format strings determined at runtime, the
format string must be parsed and checked against an argument list specification
for compatibility before it can be used. This eliminates a danger of traditional
`printf()` when using runtime formats. This ability to produce parsed format
specifiers (similar to how regular expressions can be compiled into `RE`
objects) can yield a performance boost, so in performance-sensitive code it may
be used even with statically-determined format strings.

There are a few notable differences from `printf()` (see
https://abseil.io/docs/cpp/guides/format). We try in the `str_format` library to
be flexible without information loss. If a signed argument is formatted with an
unsigned conversion like `%u` or `%x`, we convert the argument to the
corresponding unsigned integer type before formatting, so printing negatives
with `%u` may work differently from one's expectations on this previously
undefined behavior.

Best of all, it is highly optimized and much faster than `sprintf()` or the
deprecated `StringPrintf()` (see [format-shootout]). Please give this library a
try anywhere you'd use printf-style formatting.

### Examples

I'll close with a few examples.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
#include "absl/strings/str_format.h"

absl::StrAppendFormat(&s, "Also, %s\n", epilogue);

// Logs something like: "billydonahue         12345.67"
// When formatting streamed output, prefer `absl::StreamFormat()` instead of
// stream I/O manipulators like `std::setw`.
// See https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Streams for more information.
for (const auto& g : hard_workers)
  std::cout &lt;&lt; absl::StreamFormat("%-20s %8.2f", g.username, g.bonus);

// POSIX positional specifiers (yields "veni, vidi, vici!").
summary = absl::StrFormat("%2$s, %3$s, %1$s!", "vici", "veni", "vidi");

std::string letter = response.format_string();  // known only at runtime
// Reject unacceptable form letters.
auto format = absl::ParsedFormat&lt;'d', 's', 's'&gt;::New(letter);
if (!format) {
  // ... error case ...
  return;
}
letter = StringF(*format, vacation_days, from, to);

// Precompile for performance. Yields, e.g., rows like:
//   "&lt;tr&gt;&lt;td&gt;alice&lt;/td&gt;&lt;td&gt;00000123&lt;/td&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;\n"
//   "&lt;tr&gt;&lt;td&gt;bob&lt;/td&gt;&lt;td&gt;00004567&lt;/td&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;\n"
static const auto* const pfmt = new absl::ParsedFormat&lt;'s','d'&gt;(
    "&lt;tr&gt;&lt;td&gt;%s&lt;/td&gt;&lt;td&gt;%08d&lt;/td&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;\n");
for (const auto& joe : folks) {
  absl::StrAppendFormat(&output, *pfmt, joe.name, joe.id);
}
// The 'FormatStreamed' adaptor can be used to format any ostream-formattable
// 'x'.
s = absl::StrFormat("[%-12s]", absl::FormatStreamed(x));

</pre>

[format-shootout]: https://docs.google.com/a/google.com/spreadsheets/d/1-pEDOge3DzXiyEoO9xC2JJxL4Ybf-XdPu1nXzBiUsAM "Format shootout results"
