---
title: "Tip of the Week #18: String Formatting with Substitute"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/18
type: markdown
order: "018"
---

Originally posted as TotW #18 on October 4, 2012

*By [Titus Winters](mailto:titus@cs.ucr.edu)*

Updated 2022-11-16

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/18](https://abseil.io/tips/18)


It happens all the time: you’re writing code and suddenly you need to assemble a
new string from a template and some run-time values. Maybe it’s an error message
from a failed Stubby call, maybe it’s the body of an email being sent from an
internal process. Probably the most common mechanism for string formatting
outside of google3 is `sprintf/snprintf`. But as we wander through the codebase,
we see many things that people have done, and many places where C++ engineers
are spending too much of their time, too many cycles, and too many lines of code
to accomplish this task. In this week’s tip, we will walk through some common
options and point out their various drawbacks.

## Option 1: String Concatenation (built-in)

Some people still just reach for basic string concatenation:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::string GetErrorMessage(const std::string& op, const std::string& user,
                            int id) {
  return "Error in " + op + " for user " + user + "(" + std::to_string(id) +
         ")";
}
</pre>

As we saw back in [Tip #3](/tips/3), there are problems with this approach:
chains of calls to `operator+()` wind up making (and wasting) temporaries, and
cause needless copies of your data.

## Option 2: absl::StrCat() (google3/third_party/absl/strings/str_cat.h)

Just like in Tip #3, `absl::StrCat()` avoids those copies, handles the numeric
conversion for us (go/willitstrcat), and even allows us to operate on
`string_view` efficiently (which is better in cases when we are called with a
C-style string):

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::string GetErrorMessage(absl::string_view op, absl::string_view user,
                            int id) {
  return absl::StrCat("Error in ", op, " for user ", user, "(", id, ")");
}
</pre>

However, it’s still a little difficult to see at a glance what the string
actually will look like: Where are the spaces? Do the parentheses in the string
match up properly?

## Option 3: absl::Substitute (google3/third_party/absl/strings/substitute.h)

However, an even better option exists: `absl::Substitute()`. `Substitute()` uses
the same techniques as `StrCat()` to allow you to pass numeric values,
`std::string`s, `char*`s, and `string_view`s. It doesn’t require you to remember
arcane format strings for numeric types (or `string_view`).

Even though everyone can more-or-less understand printf-style format strings,
Substitute format strings are just as hard to misinterpret:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::string GetErrorMessage(absl::string_view op, absl::string_view user,
                            int id) {
  return absl::Substitute("Error in $0 for user $1 ($2)", op, user, id);
}
</pre>

Good readability, and better performance? LGTM.
