---
title: "Tip of the Week #215: Stringifying Custom Types with <code>AbslStringify()</code>"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/215
type: markdown
order: "215"
---

Originally posted as TotW #215 on November 2, 2022

*By [Phoebe Liang](mailto:phoebeliang@google.com)*

Updated 2022-11-16

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/215](https://abseil.io/tips/215)


Abseil now contains a new lightweight mechanism, `AbslStringify()`, that allows
users to format user-defined types as strings. User-defined types that are
extended using `AbslStringify()` work out of the box with `absl::StrFormat`,
`absl::StrCat` and `absl::Substitute`.

As with most type extensions, you should own the type you wish to extend.

Let's say that we have a simple `Point` struct:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct Point {
  int x;
  int y;
};
</pre>

If we want a `Point` to be formattable with `absl::StrFormat()`,
`absl::StrCat()` and `absl::Substitute()`, we add a `friend` function template
named `AbslStringify()`:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct Point {
  template &lt;typename Sink&gt;
  friend void AbslStringify(Sink& sink, const Point& p) {
    absl::Format(&sink, "(%d, %d)", p.x, p.y);
  }

  int x;
  int y;
};
</pre>

Note: `AbslStringify()` utilizes a generic "sink" buffer to construct its
string. This sink has an interface similar to `absl::FormatSink`, but does not
support `PutPaddedString()`.

Now `absl::StrCat("The point is ", p)` and `absl::Substitute("The point is $0",
p)` will just work.

Note: `absl::StrFormat()` also provides
[a more customizable extension point](https://abseil.io/docs/cpp/guides/format#user-defined-formats)
`AbslFormatConvert()` that is not supported by `absl::StrCat()`.

## Type Deduction with the <code>%v</code> Specifier

But what if we want to format our type using `absl::StrFormat()`?
`absl::StrFormat()`'s existing type specifiers don't support user-defined types
extended with `AbslStringify()`, so we would have to do something like this:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
absl::StrFormat("The point is (%d, %d)", p.x, p.y)
</pre>

This is obviously not ideal. It doesn't make use of the extension at all and it
duplicates the format string used in the `AbslStringify()` definition. Instead,
we can use the new type specifier `%v`:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
absl::StrFormat("The point is %v", p)
</pre>

`%v` uses type deduction to format an argument. `%v` supports the formatting of
most primitive types, as well as any types extended using `AbslStringify()`. You
can think of `%v` as a generic way to format a "value" of any type that
`absl::StrFormat()` can deduce. `%v` can also be used directly within
`AbslStringify()` definitions.

The `%v` specifier deduces the following types:

*   `d` for signed integral values
*   `u` for unsigned integral values
*   `g` for floating point values
    *   `double`
    *   `float`
    *   `long double`
*   `s` for string values
    *   `std::string`
    *   `absl::string_view`
    *   `std::string_view`
    *   `absl::Cord`

NOTE: `const char*` is **not** supported. See below for more information.

Some examples:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
absl::StrFormat("%v", std::string{"hello"})    -&gt; "hello"
absl::StrFormat("%v", 42)    -&gt; "42"
absl::StrFormat("%v", uint64_t{16})    -&gt; "16"
absl::StrFormat("%v", 1.6)  -&gt; "1.6"
absl::StrFormat("%v", true) -&gt; "true"
</pre>

### Types With Special Handling

`%v` intentionally does not support `char` and `const char*` due to ambiguity in
the desired output format. Boolean values are printed as `"true"` and `"false"`
rather than `"1"` and `"0"`, which is how `absl::StrFormat()` and
`absl::StrCat()` print booleans otherwise.

## Integration With Other Libraries

`AbslStringify()` has additional support throughout other Abseil libraries.

### Logging

Types that define `AbslStringify()` are directly loggable:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct Point {
  template &lt;typename Sink&gt;
  friend void AbslStringify(Sink& sink, const Point& p) {
    absl::Format(&sink, "(%v, %v)", p.x, p.y);
  }

  int x = 10;
  int y = 20;
};

Point p;

std::cout &lt;&lt; p;
</pre>

This code will produce a message in the logs like:

</pre>
I0926 09:00:00.000000   12345 main.cc:10] (10, 20)
</pre>

It is recommended that custom types be made loggable by implementing
`AbslStringify()` rather than `operator<<` as it is a universal stringification
extension that also enables `absl::StrFormat`, `absl::StrCat` and
`absl::Substitute` support.

### Protocol Buffer Types

Protocol buffers are formattable using `AbslStringify()`. Since
`AbslStringify()` provides an overall smoother user experience over
`DebugString()`, it is recommended that users use `AbslStringify()` when
formatting protos as strings.

<!-- TODO(b/259751293): Revisit once documentation and policy are done -->

`AbslStringify()` also redacts some sensitive fields from its output for
security/privacy reasons; see go/proto-stringify-redaction for details.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
message MyProto {
  optional string my_string = 1
}

MyProto my_proto;
my_proto.set_my_string("hello world");

absl::StrCat("My proto is: ", my_proto);
absl::StrFormat("My proto is: %v", my_proto);
std::cout &lt;&lt; my_proto;
</pre>

## Closing Words

Aside from user-defined types where its use is required, the `%v` type specifier
is intended for use in cases where the precise formatting is not important. It
is essentially a catch-all "just print it in a human readable manner" specifier.
If you require any other guarantees beyond that, please use one of the more
specific type specifiers.
