---
title: "Performance Tip of the Week #9: Optimizations past their prime"
layout: fast
sidenav: side-nav-fast.html
published: true
permalink: fast/9
type: markdown
order: "009"
---

Originally posted as Fast TotW #9 on June 24, 2019

*By [Chris Kennelly](mailto:ckennelly@google.com)*

Updated 2023-03-02

Quicklink: [abseil.io/fast/9](https://abseil.io/fast/9)


## Overview

Optimizations don't always age gracefully. Faster yesterday might mean slower
today.

Benchmarks citing performance on Intel Pentium 3's or AMD Opterons may have been
meaningful several years ago, but optimization equilibria, originally chosen for
long-unplugged platforms, may have changed since. Let's look at a couple
examples where well-intended optimizations ultimately hurt performance in the
long run.

## Popcount

In 2008, Intel introduced the `popcnt` instruction to determine the number of
set bits in a 32- or 64-bit integer. This is of interest for computing hamming
distances and a bunch of other things. Without the instruction, we can use a
slightly
[more complex, longer sequence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamming_weight#Efficient_implementation)
of shifts, bitwise ands, and adds to achieve the same.

Google's predecessor library to C++20's
[bit manipulation functions](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/numeric/bits.h)
offered two population count routines. `CountOnes64` uses `popcnt` if the
compiler knows it's going to be available and a fallback otherwise.
`CountOnes64withPopcount` unconditionally uses `popcnt` on x86_64 machines.

When this instruction first started rolling out, it made sense to test for the
availability of the instruction at runtime before choosing which one to call.
This would be faster for crunching data on the machines with the instruction and
we'd avoid `SIGILL`'ing on machines without it.

Years later, every `x86_64` machine in the fleet supported this instruction, so
`CountOnes64` and `CountOnes64withPopcount` should be the same, right?

Unfortunately, we're still paying for all of the runtime dispatch machinery to
check availability of the instruction, even though the answer is always "yes."
We could make this a compile time constant, but this is akin to picking up rocks
faster when we should have instead just left them on the ground. The branch cost
might seem trivial, but there's actually more to be concerned about here.

Prior to cleanups, the implementations weren't the same.

*   `CountOnes64withPopcount` used inline assembly to unconditionally emit the
    `popcnt` instruction. The inline assembly prevented the compiler from
    working around a
    [false dependency bug](https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=62011)
    in some processors.
*   When the compiler builtin is used (the "slow" version), we actually end up
    with a better sequence of machine code and can perform stronger
    optimizations at compile-time around constant folding.

Once the compiler began emitting the `popcnt` instruction for
`__builtin_popcount`, `CountOnes64` was the unconditionally better
implementation.

Ironically, code using runtime dispatch to select a "fast" implementation is
(unintentionally) preferring an actually slower implementation
(`CountOnes64withPopcount`) and paying for the privilege.

## <code>CHECK_EQ</code>

In 2005, Google implemented its `CHECK` logging macros in terms of
`CheckOpString`, a thin wrapper around a `std::string*`. This later underwent
further optimizations, adding hints to the compiler optimizer that the
comparison would likely be true.

As of early 2019, a simplified implementation for optimized builds for
`CHECK_EQ(a, b)`, after preprocessing looked like:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
template&lt;typename T1, typename T2&gt;
std::string* MakeCheckOpString(const T1& a, const T2& b, const char*);

std::string* Check_EQ_Impl(const T1& a, const T2& b, const char* error) {
  if (ABSL_PREDICT_TRUE(a == b))
    return nullptr;
  else
    return MakeCheckOpString(a, b, error);
}

struct CheckOpString {
  CheckOpString(std::string* str) : str_(str) {}
  operator bool() const { return ABSL_PREDICT_FALSE(str_ != nullptr); }
  std::string* str_;
};

#define CHECK_EQ(a, b)                                                \
  while (CheckOpString _result = Check_EQ_Impl(a, b, "...error..."))  \
    ...log failure...
</pre>

When LLVM generated assembly for this code, it made two checks:

*   `a == b`: We predict that this is typically true.
*   `str_ != nullptr`: We predict that this is typically false.

...but the second check is redundant. Once we've determined that `a == b`,
`str_` is *always* `nullptr`. This is a missed compiler optimization, but the
optimizer faces the challenge of layers of complexity and hand-tuning added to
this code over a decade.

Removing `CheckOpString` completely removes the extra branch: We compare `a` and
`b`, but the optimizer does not need to reason about `CheckOpString`. Working
directly with `std::string*` for the comparison leads to better code.
Ironically, this optimization had already been applied to *debug* builds, added
in 2008.

## Best practices

*   Prefer writing clear, idiomatic code whenever possible. It is not only
    easier to read and debug, but in the long run, also easier for the compiler
    to optimize.
*   Whenever you find a low-level performance optimization that requires fancy
    bit-twiddling, intrinsics code, or inline assembly, consider first whether
    this is something the compiler could do.
*   If the code is hot, and the optimization is not something the compiler can
    be taught to perform, then: prefer portable code, possibly using
    [hwy](https://github.com/google/highway/blob/master/hwy) to generate
    efficient and portable vector code, failing that use intrinsics, failing
    that use inline asm (this should be extremely rare). Avoiding inline
    assembly makes the code more portable across microarchitectures.
*   Keep the "naive" code you are replacing. If you are optimizing `ComputeFoo`,
    consider keeping the simple implementation in a `REFERENCE_ComputeFoo`
    function. This makes it easy to write a unit-test for the new implementation
    that ensures the two functions are equivalent; it makes it easier to write a
    microbenchmark; and it makes it easier to revert to the reference code when
    (not if) the machine-dependent implementation outlives its usefulness.
*   Include a microbenchmark with your change.
*   When designing or changing configuration knobs, ensure that the choices stay
    optimal over time. Frequently, overriding the default can lead to suboptimal
    behavior when the *default changes* by pinning things in a
    worse-than-out-of-the-box state. Designing the knobs
    [in terms of the outcome](https://youtu.be/J6SNO5o9ADg?t=1521) rather than
    specific behavior aspects can make such overrides easier (or even possible)
    to evolve.
