---
title: "Tip of the Week #218: Designing Extension Points With FTADLE"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/218
type: markdown
order: "218"
---

Originally posted as TotW #218 on January 19, 2023

*By [Andy Soffer](mailto:asoffer@google.com)*

Updated 2023-01-19

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/218](https://abseil.io/tips/218)


*Ftadle. It's a perfectly cromulent word. ~ Unknown*

## Designing Extension Points

Suppose you work on a library called `sketchy`, that draws on a canvas. You
already provide ways to draw some common things like points, lines, and text,
but you want to provide a mechanism where users can specify how to draw their
own types. You're designing an **extension point**.

### Design Goals For Extension Points

C++ provides many mechanisms for defining extension points, each with their own
benefits and drawbacks. When defining an extension point in C++ there are
several considerations worth weighing:

*   Readability -- How easy is it for an engineer to understand the relationship
    between your library and the extension?

*   Maintainability -- How easy will it be change the extension point as the
    needs of your library and your library's users change?

*   Dependency Hygiene -- Does your extension point require your library to be
    linked in to a user's binary? We want to make sure extension points play
    nicely with
    [IWYU](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Include_What_You_Use),
    so if a header needs to be included for the extension mechanism to work, the
    extended types should actually use something from that header.

*   Lack of [ODR violations](http://go/odr-violation) -- Some mechanisms make it
    easy to have different portions of your program have contradictory views
    about what a program means. ODR violations are always a bug.

### FTADLE: A Good Pattern With A Great Name

When defining an extension point, we recommend following a pattern that we
lovingly call *FTADLE[^1] (Friend Template
[ADL](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/adl) Extension)*. FTADLE does
well on each of the considerations listed above. It relies heavily on a language
feature known as ADL, or Argument Dependent Lookup; the process by which the
compiler determines what function is intended when a function call appears
without namespace qualification (i.e., no `::`s). ADL is explained in detail in
[Tip #49](/tips/49), To write an extension using the FTADLE pattern:

1.  Pick a name for your extension point and prefix it with your project's
    namespace. Our extension is for drawing, and our project lives in the
    `sketchy` namespace, so we'll call our extension `SketchyDraw`.

1.  Design a type to be passed in to `SketchyDraw` that has all the behavior
    your users will need. In our case, this is the `sketchy::Canvas` on which
    users can draw their types.

1.  Implement your functionality as an overload set. One member of that overload
    set will be a template and will call your extension point. The non-template
    functions in the overload set should be the basic building blocks; the
    primitive types that your API supports. In our running example, that means
    functions that accept the types `sketchy::Point` and `sketchy::Line`.

    <pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
    namespace sketchy {
    // Draws the point `p` on the canvas `c`.
    void Draw(Canvas& c, const Point& p);

    // Draws the line segment `l` on the canvas `c`.
    void Draw(Canvas& c, const Line& l);

    // For any user-defined type `T` which implements `SketchyDraw` (see
    // documentation that I've definitely written), draws `value` on the canvas
    // `c`.
    template &lt;typename T&gt;
    void Draw(Canvas& c, const T& value) {
      // Called without namespace qualifiers. We rely on ADL to find the correct
      // overload. See [Tip #49]([Tip #49](/tips/49)) for details on ADL.
      SketchyDraw(c, value);
    }

    }  // namespace sketchy
    </pre>

With this extension-point designed, users will now be able to make their types
drawable. How can an unrelated type add this `Draw` functionality without adding
an explicit dependency? We can make use of a friend function to do so. By adding
a friend function template in their type named `SketchyDraw` with the
appropriate signature. the template overload above will use ADL to find the
`SketchyDraw` function. For example,

</pre>
class Triangle {
 public:
  explicit Triangle(Point a, Point b, Point c) : a_(a), b_(b), c_(c) {}

template &lt;typename SC&gt; friend void SketchyDraw(SC& canvas, const Triangle&
triangle) { // Note: This is a template, even though the only type we ever
expect to be // passed in for `SC` is `sketchy::Canvas`. Using `sketchy::Canvas`
directly // works, but pulls in an extra dependency that may not be used by all
users // of `Triangle`. sketchy::Draw(canvas, sketchy::Line(triangle.a_,
triangle.b_)); sketchy::Draw(canvas, sketchy::Line(triangle.b_, triangle.c_));
sketchy::Draw(canvas, sketchy::Line(triangle.c_, triangle.a_)); }

private: Point a_, b_, c_; };

// Usage:
void DrawTriangles(sketchy::Canvas& canvas, absl::Span&lt;const Triangle&gt; triangles) {
  for (const Triangle& triangle : triangles) {
    sketchy::Draw(canvas, triangle);
  }
}
</pre>

NOTE: Users of the library never call the ADL extension point `SketchyDraw`
directly. Rather, the library should provide a function like `sketchy::Draw`
which invokes the extension point on the user's behalf.

## Other Examples

The FTADLE pattern has been used with several other common libraries.

*   The `AbslHashValue` extension point allows you to make your type hashable by
    any of Abseil's hash containers. See [Tip #152](/tips/152) for details.

*   The `AbslStringify` extension point allows you to print your type with many
    many Abseil libraries, including logging, `absl::StrCat`, `absl::StrFormat`,
    and `absl::Substitute`.

## What To Avoid

Some common extension point mechanisms fall short of our design goals. Virtual
functions, checking at compile-time for member functions, and template
specialization are each brittle in their own way, as discussed below.

### Virtual Functions

Though perhaps the most familiar, virtual functions and class hierarchies are
often overly rigid. They are nearly impossible to refactor, because the base
class and all derived classes need to be updated in lock-step. We rarely get
designs right on the first try, so it's prudent to have a design that we can
change later.

Beyond the rigidity, class hierarchies *force* a dependency on your users. In
the case of `sketchy`, users are required to depend on `sketchy` code, even when
only some of their binaries want to use the dependency. FTADLE ensures that only
binaries that need to do something `sketchy` pay that cost.

The same is true for non-template friend extension points as well (for example
`std::ostream`'s `operator<<`). Each class that wishes to implement `operator<<`
must include one of the standard library headers defining `std::ostream` (e.g.,
`<ostream>`, `<iostream>`). This means that (barring optimizations) the code for
`std::ostream` will be compiled and linked into the binary whether or not
`operator<<` is used, a potential extra cost to compile-times and binary size.

### Member Functions

With some template trickery, you could check to see if a class has a particular
method by name (or even signature). However, names can be misleading.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
// Requires that the image have a `draw()` member function.
template &lt;typename Image&gt;
void DisplayImage(const Image& image) {
  image.draw();
}

class Cowboy {
 public:
  // Draws the gun from the holster.
  void draw();
};

int main() {
  Cowboy c;
  DisplayImage(c);  // Oops, not the "draw" we meant.
}
</pre>

With the FTADLE pattern, the extension point is prefixed with the project's
namespace, mitigating accidental conformance.

### Template Specializations

Another common but dangerous technique is to use template specializations. This
is how `std::hash` and `std::less` are specialized.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
namespace std {

template&lt;&gt;
struct hash&lt;MyType&gt; {
  size_t operator()(const MyType& m) const {
    return HashCombine(std::hash&lt;&gt;()(m.foo()), std::hash&lt;&gt;()(m.bar()));
  }
};

}  // namespace std
</pre>

Aside from requiring more boilerplate, this technique is ripe for
[ODR violations](http://go/odr-violation). While not terribly common, providing
different specializations for this type in different translation units, or even
the same definition twice is an ODR violation. More commonly, if such a
specialization is available only in some translation units but not others,
metaprogramming techniques will produce different answers to the question "is
there a hash function available?" which is also an ODR-violation.

Beyond that, it is generally bad practice to open up a namespace you do not own
(amongst other reasons, because it leads to ODR violations). We should design
our APIs to avoid bad practices so as not to accidentally encourage dangerous
practices.

## Conclusion

The FTADLE extension point pattern is readable, maintainable, mitigates against
ODR violations, and avoids adding dependencies. If your library needs an
extension point, FTADLE comes highly recommended.

[^1]: C++ has a rich tradition of almost-pronouncable
    [acronyms](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/acronyms), including
    [RAII](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/raii),
    [IFNDR](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/ndr),
    [CRTP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curiously_recurring_template_pattern),
    and [SFINAE](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/sfinae). We have
    been pronouncing FTADLE as "fftah-dill" (similar to "battle" but with the
    'b' replaced by the sound at the end of "raft"), but we encourage you to
    pronounce it in whichever way brings you the most joy.
