---
title: "Tip of the Week #198: Tag Types"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/198
type: markdown
order: "198"
---

Originally posted as TotW #198 on August 12, 2021

*By [Alex Konradi](mailto:akonradi@google.com)*

Updated 2022-01-24

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/198](https://abseil.io/tips/198)


Suppose we have a class `Foo`:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
class Foo {
 public:
  explicit Foo(int x, int y);
  Foo& operator=(const Foo&) = delete;
  Foo(const Foo&) = delete;
};
</pre>

`Foo` is neither movable nor copyable, but it is constructible, e.g. `Foo f(1,
2);`. Since it has a public constructor, we can easily make an instance wrapped
in a `std::optional`:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::optional&lt;Foo&gt; maybe_foo;
maybe_foo.emplace(5, 10);
</pre>

That's great, but what if the `std::optional` is declared `const`, so we can't
call `emplace()`? Luckily for us, `std::optional` has a constructor for this:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// Pass std::in_place as the first argument, followed by the arguments for Foo's
// constructor.
const std::optional&lt;Foo&gt; maybe_foo(std::in_place, 5, 10);
</pre>

Wait, what's going on with `std::in_place`? If we look at
[the documentation](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/optional/optional)
for `std::optional` construction, we can see that one of the overloads takes a
`std::in_place_t` as the first argument, along with a list of additional
arguments. Since
[`std::in_place`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/in_place) is an
instance of `std::in_place_t`, the compiler chooses the *emplacing constructor*,
which instantiates `Foo` within the `std::optional` by forwarding the rest of
the arguments to `Foo`'s constructor.

If we look a little closer at the documentation for `std::in_place_t`, we see
that it's... an empty struct. No special qualifiers or magic declarations. The
only thing even mildly special about it is that the standard library includes a
named instance of it, `std::in_place`.

## Overload Resolution Via Tag Types

`std::in_place_t` is a member of a loose category of classes sometimes referred
to as "tag types". The function of these classes is to pass information to the
compiler by "tagging" specific overloads in an overload set. By providing an
instance of an appropriate tag class to an overloaded function (often a
constructor), we can use the compiler's ordinary resolution rules to make it
select the desired overload. In the case of our `std::optional` construction,
the compiler sees that the first argument is of type `std::in_place_t` and so
chooses the matching emplacing constructor.

Though `std::in_place_t` was introduced in C++17, the use of empty classes for
tagging overloads in the standard library has been prevalent since
[`std::piecewise_construct_t`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/piecewise_construct_t),
was introduced in C++11 to select the emplacing constructor for `std::pair`.
C++17 significantly expanded the set of tag types in the standard library.

## Templates, of Course

Besides disambiguating overloads, another common use case for tag types is to
pass type information to templated constructors. Consider these two structs:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
struct A { A(); /* internal members */ };
struct B { B(); /* internal members */ };
</pre>

Let's try to construct an instance of
[`std::variant<A, B>`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/variant) with
each:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
// These work if A and B are copy- or move-constructible, but incur the
// performance cost of an extra copy or move construction.
std::variant&lt;A, B&gt; with_a{A()};
std::variant&lt;A, B&gt; with_b{B()};

// These aren't valid C++; the language doesn't support providing constructor
// template parameters explicitly.
std::variant&lt;A, B&gt; try_templating_a&lt;A&gt;{};
std::variant&lt;A, B&gt;&lt;B&gt; try_templating_b{};
</pre>

What we need is a way to tell the `std::variant` constructor that we want to
instantiate `A` or `B` without actually providing an instance of either. For
that, we can use
[`std::in_place_type`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/in_place)!

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::variant&lt;A, B&gt; with_a{std::in_place_type&lt;A&gt;};
std::variant&lt;A, B&gt; with_b{std::in_place_type&lt;B&gt;};
</pre>

`std::in_place_type<T>` is an instance of the class template
`std::in_place_type_t<T>`, which is (unsurprisingly, at this point) empty. By
passing a value of type `std::in_place_type_t<A>` to `std::variant`'s
constructor, the compiler can deduce that the constructor template parameter is
our class `A`.

## Usage

Tag types show up occasionally when interacting with generic class templates,
especially ones from the standard library. One of the shortcomings of tag types
is that other techniques, such as factory functions, often result in more
readable code. Take the following example:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// This tag spelling requires the reader to know how std::optional interacts
// with std::in_place.
std::optional&lt;Foo&gt; with_tag(std::in_place, 5, 10);

// Here the intent is clearer: make an optional Foo by providing these arguments.
std::optional&lt;Foo&gt; with_factory = std::make_optional&lt;Foo&gt;(5, 10);
</pre>

These two `std::optional<Foo>` objects are guaranteed to be constructed
identically thanks to C++17's [mandatory copy elision](/tips/166).

So why use tags? Because factory functions don't always work:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
// This doesn't work because Foo isn't move-constructible.
std::optional&lt;std::optional&lt;Foo&gt;&gt; foo(std::make_optional&lt;Foo&gt;(5, 10));
</pre>

The above example doesn't compile because `Foo`'s move constructor is deleted.
To make this work, we use `std::in_place` to select the `std::optional`
constructor that forwards the remaining arguments.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// This constructs everything in place, resulting in a single call to Foo's
// constructor.
std::optional&lt;std::optional&lt;Foo&gt;&gt; foo(std::in_place, std::in_place, 5, 10);
</pre>

In addition to working in places where factory functions don't, tag types have
some other nice properties:

-   they are
    [literal types](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/LiteralType)
    which means we can declare `constexpr` instances, even in header files, like
    `std::in_place`;
-   because they are empty, the compiler can optimize them out, resulting in
    zero runtime overhead.

Though they're used in the standard library, encountering empty tag types in the
wild is relatively uncommon. If you find yourself using one, consider adding a
comment to help your readers:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
std::unordered_map&lt;int, Foo&gt; int_to_foo;
// std::piecewise_construct is a tag for overload resolution of std::pair's
// constructor. Emplaces 100 -&gt; Foo(5, 10) in the map.
int_to_foo.emplace(std::piecewise_construct,
                   std::forward_as_tuple(100),
                   std::forward_as_tuple(5, 10));
</pre>

## Conclusion

Tag types are a powerful way to give additional information to the compiler.
While at first glance they might seem magical, they use the same overload
resolution and template type deduction rules as the rest of C++. The standard
library uses class tags for disambiguating constructor calls, and you can use
the same mechanisms to define tags for your own needs.

## See Also

-   [std::integer_sequence](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/integer_sequence)
    for compile-time indexing of tuples
-   [passkey for std::make_shared](/tips/134#what-about-stdshared-ptr) uses tags
    to control access
