---
title: "Performance Tip of the Week #53: Precise C++ benchmark measurements with Hardware Performance Counters"
layout: fast
sidenav: side-nav-fast.html
published: true
permalink: fast/53
type: markdown
order: "053"
---

Originally posted as Fast TotW #53 on October 14, 2021

*By [Mircea Trofin](mailto:mtrofin@google.com)*

Updated 2023-09-04

Quicklink: [abseil.io/fast/53](https://abseil.io/fast/53)


Use performance benchmarks as the first line of defense in detecting costly
regressions, and as a way to guide performance improvement work. Getting to the
root cause of a change in performance can be time consuming and full of "false
leads", because on modern architectures program execution is influenced by many
factors.

In this episode, we present a productivity tool that helps lower the cost of
performance investigations by leveraging
[Hardware Performance Counters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardware_performance_counter)
to surface low-level architectural metrics. The tool is available for C++
benchmarks running on Linux, on [GitHub](https://github.com/google/benchmark).

## What are Hardware Performance Counters?

Hardware Performance Counters are a hardware feature where you can request
precise counts of events such as: instructions retired, load or store
instructions retired, clock cycles, cache misses, branches taken or
mispredicted, etc. See https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Tutorial for more
information.

With performance counters you get less noisy measurements when compared to
time-based ones. CPU timer-based measurements are noisier, even on isolated
machines, because:

*   performance counter measurements can be isolated to the benchmark process,
    and, thus, not account context switching time when the process is
    preempted - which is otherwise measured by the CPU timer,
*   we can further isolate counter increments to user mode executed instructions
    only, which further reduces noise due to context switching
*   specific counters (e.g. instruction-counting ones) inherently produce
    measurements that are almost noise-free (variations under 0.01%). This is
    because the value of such counters is independent of systemic sources of
    noise like frequency throttling.
*   finally, depending on the setup of the benchmarking machine, time-based
    measurements suffer from noise introduced by thermal effects,
    hyperthreading, or shared resource (like memory bus) access. Some counters
    will also suffer from noise due to these, but others - like instructions
    retired counters - won't.

By selecting appropriate performance counters you can get nuanced insight into
the execution of a benchmark. For instance, a measurement using CPU time that
points to a regression may be caused by subtle changes in executable layout,
which increases branch mispredictions. This is generally not actionable and
considered acceptable. Identifying this is the case, when only looking at time
measurements, is not very productive and not scalable over a large benchmark
suite corpus. With performance counter-based measurements, it is immediately
apparent by observing branch mispredict variations and instruction count
variations, and the detection is easily scriptable.

## How-to gather performance counter data

The [Google Benchmark](https://github.com/google/benchmark) project simplifies
the process of writing a benchmark. An example of its use may be seen
[here](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-test-suite/tree/main/MicroBenchmarks/LoopVectorization)

The benchmark harness support for performance counters consists of allowing the
user to specify up to 3 counters in a comma-separated list, via the
`--benchmark_perf_counters` flag, to be measured alongside the time measurement.
Just like time measurement, each counter value is captured right before the
benchmarked code is run, and right after. The difference is reported to the user
as per-iteration values (similar to the time measurement).

### Basic usage

**Note**: counter names are hardware vendor and version specific. The example
here assumes Intel Skylake. Check how this maps to other versions of Intel CPUs,
other vendors (e.g. AMD), or other architectures (e.g. ARM); also refer to
[perfmon2](https://perfmon2.sourceforge.net/) which we use for counter name
resolution, and/or `perf list`.

Build a benchmark executable - for example, let's use "swissmap" from
[fleetbench](https://github.com/google/fleetbench):

<pre class="prettyprint code">
bazel build -c opt //fleetbench/swissmap:cold_swissmap_benchmark
</pre>

Run the benchmark; let's ask for instructions, cycles, and loads:

<pre class="prettyprint code">
bazel-bin/fleetbench/swissmap/cold_swissmap_benchmark \
  --benchmark_filter='BM_.*::absl::flat_hash_set.*64.*set_size:64.*density:0' \
  --benchmark_perf_counters=INSTRUCTIONS,CYCLES,MEM_UOPS_RETIRED:ALL_LOADS
</pre>

The output looks like:

```
Running ./cold_swissmap_benchmark
Run on (8 X 4667.91 MHz CPU s)
CPU Caches:
  L1 Data 32 KiB (x4)
  L1 Instruction 32 KiB (x4)
  L2 Unified 256 KiB (x4)
  L3 Unified 8192 KiB (x1)
Load Average: 2.31, 2.08, 1.95
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benchmark                                                                             Time             CPU   Iterations UserCounters...
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BM_FindMiss_Cold<::absl::flat_hash_set, 64>/set_size:64/density:0                  18.4 ns         18.4 ns     39048136 CYCLES=82.9019 INSTRUCTIONS=35.7284 MEM_UOPS_RETIRED:ALL_LOADS=6.05507
BM_FindHit_Cold<::absl::flat_hash_set, 64>/set_size:64/density:0                   33.3 ns         33.3 ns     20600490 CYCLES=152.156 INSTRUCTIONS=55.0354 MEM_UOPS_RETIRED:ALL_LOADS=15.0034
BM_InsertHit_Cold<::absl::flat_hash_set, 64>/set_size:64/density:0                 34.8 ns         34.8 ns     19004416 CYCLES=157.956 INSTRUCTIONS=59.0354 MEM_UOPS_RETIRED:ALL_LOADS=16.0013
BM_Iterate_Cold<::absl::flat_hash_set, 64>/set_size:64/density:0                   33.5 ns         33.5 ns     25444389 CYCLES=152.431 INSTRUCTIONS=57.9225 MEM_UOPS_RETIRED:ALL_LOADS=13.3892
BM_InsertManyOrdered_Cold<::absl::flat_hash_set, 64>/set_size:64/density:0         54.9 ns         54.8 ns     14141958 CYCLES=242.373 INSTRUCTIONS=111.455 MEM_UOPS_RETIRED:ALL_LOADS=33.1838
BM_InsertManyUnordered_Cold<::absl::flat_hash_set, 64>/set_size:64/density:0       50.0 ns         50.0 ns     14234753 CYCLES=227.516 INSTRUCTIONS=111.415 MEM_UOPS_RETIRED:ALL_LOADS=33.1781
```

So we can see that `BM_FindMiss_Cold` took approximately 83 cycles, 36
instructions, and 6 memory ops per iteration.

## Summary

Use the `--benchmark_perf_counters` flag in https://github.com/google/benchmark
benchmarks to quickly drill into the root cause of a performance regression, or
to guide performance optimization work.
