---
title: "Performance Tip of the Week #21: Improving the efficiency of your regular expressions"
layout: fast
sidenav: side-nav-fast.html
published: true
permalink: fast/21
type: markdown
order: "021"
---

Originally posted as Fast TotW #21 on January 16, 2020

*By [Paul Wankadia](mailto:junyer@google.com) and [Darryl Gove](mailto:djgove@google.com)*

Updated 2023-03-02

Quicklink: [abseil.io/fast/21](https://abseil.io/fast/21)


Regular expressions are used, misused and abused nearly everywhere. Google is no
exception, alas, and at our scale, even a simple change can save hundreds or
thousands of cores. In this tip, we describe ways to use RE2 more efficiently.

NOTE: This tip is specifically about RE2 and C++. A number of the ideas below
are universally applicable, but discussion of other libraries and other
languages is out of scope.

## Using regular expressions: a representative sample

As a prelude, let's consider an example of how regular expressions are often
used. This snippet looks for a zone ID at the end of the `zone_name` string and
extracts its value into the `zone_id` integer:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
int zone_id;
if (RE2::FullMatch(zone_name, R"(.*\.zone(\d+))", &zone_id)) {
</pre>

This tip describes several techniques for improving efficiency in situations
such as this. These fall into two broad categories: improving the code that uses
regular expressions; and improving the regular expressions themselves.

## Writing more efficient code

### A few words about <code>RE2</code> objects

In order to understand why the following techniques matter, we need to talk
briefly about `RE2` objects. In the initial example, we passed a pattern string
to `RE2::FullMatch()`. Passing a pattern string instead of an `RE2` object
implicitly constructs a temporary `RE2` object. During construction, RE2 parses
the pattern string to a syntax tree and compiles the syntax tree to an
automaton. Depending on the complexity of the regular expression, construction
can require a lot of CPU time and can build an automaton that will have a large
memory footprint.

### Use Abseil functions for literal strings

In many situations, regular expressions are unnecessary because simple string
operations will suffice. For exact matching, `absl::string_view` defines
`operator==()`. For substring, prefix and suffix matching, Abseil provides
`absl::StrContains()`, `absl::StartsWith()` and `absl::EndsWith()`,
respectively, in
[absl/strings/match.h](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/strings/match.h).
These are much faster than regular expressions and more readable, so using them
where possible is recommended.

For example:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
const RE2 re(absl::StrCat(row_key, ":.*"));
for (const auto& row : rows) {
  if (RE2::FullMatch(row, re)) {
</pre>

could be rewritten as:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
const std::string prefix = absl::StrCat(row_key, ":");
for (const auto& row : rows) {
  if (absl::StartsWith(row, prefix)) {
</pre>

### Minimise <code>RE2</code> object churn

As discussed above, constructing `RE2` objects can be expensive, so as a rule of
thumb, they should be long-lived. Precompiling or caching them where possible is
recommended.

### Use <code>LazyRE2</code> for static or global regular expressions

The `RE2` class is unsafe for direct use with static or global regular
expressions. Use `LazyRE2` instead because it lazily constructs the underlying
`RE2` object and never destructs it.

The initial example could be rewritten as:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
static constexpr LazyRE2 kZoneRe = {R"(.*\.zone(\d+))"};
int zone_id;
if (RE2::FullMatch(zone_name, *kZoneRe, &zone_id)) {
</pre>

## Writing more efficient regular expressions

### Use <code>RE2::PartialMatch()</code> to avoid leading or trailing <code>.*</code>

Using `RE2::FullMatch()` with leading or trailing `.*` is an antipattern.
Instead, change it to `RE2::PartialMatch()` and remove the `.*`.
`RE2::PartialMatch()` performs an unanchored search, so it is also necessary to
anchor the regular expression (i.e. with `^` or `$`) to indicate that it must
match at the start or end of the string. Let's look at some examples.

#### Replacing leading <code>.*</code>

For a regular expression with a leading `.*`, the leading `.*` should be removed
and the regular expression should be anchored at the end with `$`. For example,
`.*-(?:bar|qux)-foo` should become `-(?:bar|qux)-foo$`.

The leading `.*` prevents RE2 from terminating reverse execution (i.e. backwards
from the end of the input string) after matching the last byte of interest. When
the remainder of the input string is relatively large, RE2 has to do a lot more
work for no benefit. More about that shortly...

The initial example could be rewritten further as:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
static constexpr LazyRE2 kZoneRe = {R"(\.zone(\d+)$)"};
int zone_id;
if (RE2::PartialMatch(zone_name, *kZoneRe, &zone_id)) {
</pre>

#### Replacing trailing <code>.*</code>

For a regular expression with a trailing `.*`, the trailing `.*` should be
removed and the regular expression should be anchored at the start with `^`. For
example, `foo-(?:bar|qux)-.*` should become `^foo-(?:bar|qux)-`. RE2 will detach
the `^foo-` prefix and match it with `memcmp(3)`. (Note that this optimisation
applies when the regular expression has `^` plus some literal string as its
prefix--even when using `RE2::FullMatch()`!)

The trailing `.*` prevents RE2 from terminating execution after matching the
last byte of interest. When the remainder of the input string is relatively
large, RE2 has to do a lot more work for no benefit. More about that very
shortly...

#### Replacing leading and trailing <code>.*</code>

For a regular expression with both a leading and trailing `.*`, both the leading
and trailing `.*` should be removed. For example, `.*-(?:bar|qux)-.*` should
become `-(?:bar|qux)-`.

The leading `.*` prevents RE2 from using `memchr(3)` to find the first byte of
interest. (Note that this optimisation applies when the regular expression has
one distinct first byte such as the `f` in `foo\d+`, but not when there are two
or more possible first bytes such as the `\d` ≡ `[0-9]` in `\d+bar`.)

#### What <code>.*</code> really means

The problem with `.*` is that it doesn't mean "match anything" by default. In
fact, `.` ≡ `[^\n]` by default, so it matches any character that isn't newline.
RE2 defaults to UTF-8 encoding, so it builds an automaton that handles multibyte
characters. Consequently, the default meaning of `.*` is "match zero or more
multibyte characters that aren't newline". An automaton steps over the input
string one byte at a time, so executing `.*` is much slower than using
`memchr(3)` (which is typically implemented using SIMD) and it is infinitely
slower than terminating execution as soon as the regular expression has been
matched.

### Minimise capturing groups and submatches

In situations where parentheses are necessary for grouping, use a non-capturing
group (i.e. `(?:` ... `)`) unless a submatch is being extracted. Moreover,
extract as few submatches as possible because execution engine selection depends
in part on how many submatches the caller wants.

Passing `nullptr` for a no-op submatch is an antipattern. Instead, change the
capturing group to a non-capturing group.

### Use <code>absl::string_view</code> for submatches

When extracting a submatch, use `absl::string_view`. Extracting to `std::string`
necessarily involves a string copy.

The same advice applies even when extracting a submatch with numeric conversion.
Extracting to a numeric type also involves a string copy because `strtol(3)` et
al. require NUL-terminated strings. Extracting to `absl::string_view` and
calling `absl::SimpleAtoi()` et al. avoids the string copy.

The initial example could be rewritten even further as:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
static constexpr LazyRE2 kZoneRe = {R"(\.zone(\d+)$)"};
absl::string_view zone_id_str;
int zone_id;
if (RE2::PartialMatch(zone_name, *kZoneRe, &zone_id_str) &&
    absl::SimpleAtoi(zone_id_str, &zone_id)) {
</pre>

### Minimise ambiguity

The "cost" of executing a regular expression depends greatly on ambiguity. See
the comments in
[re2/onepass.cc](https://github.com/google/re2/blob/main/re2/onepass.cc) for
details, but the rules can be summarised as:

*   it must be immediately obvious which branch of an alternation to take; and
*   it must be immediately obvious when a repetition ends.

For example, `(.+)/` and `(.+?)/` are ambiguous because `.` and `/` aren't
disjoint--a `'/'` byte could be consumed by either. In contrast, `([^/]+)/` is
unambiguous because `[^/]` and `/` are disjoint. It isn't always possible to
eliminate ambiguity, but it is often possible to reduce it.

#### Exception: common prefixes of alternations

RE2 will factor common prefixes of alternations. For example, `abacus|abalone`
parses as `aba(?:cus|lone)`. This optimisation permits the regular expression to
be written in a more readable manner. Note that it applies to contiguous runs,
so lexicographically sorting the subexpressions is recommended.

### Avoid counted repetition

A subexpression of the form `x{n}`, `x{n,}` or `x{n,m}` results in `x` being
duplicated at least `n` or `m` times in the automaton. It's bad enough
(particularly when using Unicode character classes) for anchored matching, but
it's dangerous for unanchored matching because it's easy to blow up the number
of DFA states and their sizes. Each `RE2` object has a memory budget (8 MiB by
default) mostly for caching DFA states; exhausting the memory budget incurs a
considerable performance hit.

For example, constructing the entire DFA needs 22 KiB for the anchored
`^[a-q][^u-z]{13}x` versus 6 MiB for the unanchored `[a-q][^u-z]{13}x`. The
former isn't useful for searching due to being anchored, but the latter isn't
efficient due to the exponential blowup in DFA states from being unanchored.
Matching `[a-q][^u-z]+x` instead (i.e. using uncounted repetition) may be
possible, but checking the length of the match in a subsequent step might not be
acceptable.

## Bonus: Matching multiple regular expressions

To finish, let's touch on `RE2::Set` and `FilteredRE2`. These are two very
different approaches to matching multiple regular expressions, which is useful
in situations where performing multiple passes over the input string would be
prohibitively expensive. Such situations include keyword matching and logs
processing.

`RE2::Set` combines the regular expressions into one "many match" automaton. It
has strengths and weaknesses similar to those of normal DFA execution and is
suited to shorter, less complex regular expressions.

`FilteredRE2` identifies the literal string "atoms" within the regular
expressions; given which of those "atoms" occur within the input string, it
determines which regular expressions potentially match. It requires an initial
pass over the input string with something like Aho-Corasick or `RE2::Set` and is
suited to longer, more complex regular expressions.

You might also like to read about
[lightgrep](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24212-0_4),
[Hyperscan](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3323234.3323286) and
[RE-tree](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1007/s00778-003-0094-0), which were designed
specifically for matching multiple regular expressions.
