---
title: "Tip of the Week #227: Be Careful with Empty Containers and Unsigned Arithmetic"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/227
type: markdown
order: "227"
---

Originally posted as TotW #227 on November 16, 2023

*By [James Dennett](mailto:jdennett@google.com)*

Updated 2024-03-11

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/227](https://abseil.io/tips/227)


## Index-Based Loops (Still Have Their Uses)

Modern C++ code uses index-based `for` loops much less often now that
range-based `for` loops are available, but there are still times when we need to
use an index while we iterate. Parallel iteration over multiple containers is
one such case; another is when we want to process multiple adjacent elements
from a single container. In this tip we’ll look at a pitfall for the second of
these.

## Plausible Code

Let’s start by looking at some code that might be correct:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
for (int64_t i = 0; i &lt; v.size() - 1; ++i) {
  ProcessPair(v[i], v[i+1]);
}
</pre>

This code wisely takes some care to check for valid indexes before calling
`ProcessPair()`, so why do we say that it only “might” be correct? A careful
unit test (or almost any [fuzz test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuzzing))
will cover the case where `v` is empty. If the code surrounding our `for` loop
ensures that the `for` loop is never reached in that case, all is well. But if
we execute our loop with an empty `v`, C++ makes trouble for us.

## Unsigned Types to the Unrescue

Recall that
[our style guide warns](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#on_unsigned_integers)
against use of `unsigned` types in C++. The style guide also says

> Because of historical accident, the C++ standard also uses unsigned integers
> to represent the **size of containers** - many members of the standards body
> believe this to be a mistake, but it is effectively impossible to fix at this
> point.

(emphasis added)

Looking carefully, we can see that our example falls afoul of the exact problem
discussed in the style guide. When checking whether we have valid `v[i]` and
`v[i+1]` elements, we are seemingly correct in checking whether `i` is less than
`v.size() - 1` given that both elements need to be valid. However, for an empty
container `v.size()` is zero (so far, so good!), but because the type of
`v.size()` is unsigned, when we subtract one from that zero, we don't get the
value `-1`, but instead we get the *maximum* value of the given type. Then the
check for whether `i` is less than `v.size() - 1` evaluates as `true` for any
small value of `i`, and so the code will use out-of-bounds indexes for `v` -
yielding undefined behavior.

## How Should We Fix This?

Interestingly, if we make the code express its intent a little more directly,
our problem goes away.

What do we mean by “express its intent a little more directly”? What is the
intent here? The purpose of the loop condition here is to ensure that the
indexes `i` *and* `i + 1` used to index into `v` are valid.

Given that indexes in C++ are zero-based, we test whether a (non-negative) index
`i` into a container is valid by checking `i < v.size()`. It would be redundant
to check validity of both indexes (though we could do so if we wished): if `i +
1` is valid then we know that `i` is (because `i` is never negative here). “`i +
1` is valid” translates directly into C++ as `i + 1 < v.size()`. Our original
code `i < v.size() - 1` does not have such a direct translation as a statement
about the validity of an index.

The rewritten code `i + 1 < v.size()` looks almost the same as `i < v.size() -
1`, but it is crucially different in that we never subtract, so we avoid the
danger of wrapping around to a huge positive value. Did we swap this for a risk
of overflowing when we calculate `i + 1`? Only if `i` is already the largest
value of its type (`int64_t`) – so we are safe. This difference is sometimes
characterized by noting that the common, useful values of `int64_t` are a long
way away from overflowing, whereas with unsigned types such as `uint64_t`, the
very common value 0 is the smallest value of the type, so it’s much easier to
unintentionally wrap around.

## Fixed Code, Fuzz Free

With this one small change, our now-robust code looks like this:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
for (int64_t i = 0; i + 1 &lt; v.size(); ++i) {
  ProcessPair(v[i], v[i+1]);
}
</pre>

The indexes into `v` are clearly safe, without a need to look further afield to
know whether `v` might be empty.

Now we can let our fuzzer loose on the fixed code, and feel warm fuzzy feelings
that our `for` loop is bug-free and reviewer-friendly.

Note: This is just one (robust) way to write this loop; there are many others.

## Summary

While our fix doesn’t change many bytes of source code, it touches on a number
of ideas:

*   As the style guide
    [says](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#on_unsigned_integers),
    be wary of arithmetic on unsigned types in C++.
*   Remember that `container.size()` yields an unsigned type.
*   Prefer code where correctness can be verified as locally as possible.
*   Try to make code correspond as directly as possible to the underlying
    intent.
