---
title: "Tip of the Week #231: Between Here and There: Some Minor Overlooked Algorithms"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/231
type: markdown
order: "231"
---

Originally posted as TotW #231 on March 7, 2024

*By [James Dennett](mailto:jdennett@google.com)*

Updated 2024-09-30

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/231](https://abseil.io/tips/231)


## Overview

In recent C++ versions the Standard Library has added a few functions whose sole
job is to supply some (specific!) point somewhere between two other points `x`
and `y`: [`std::clamp`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/clamp) (from
C++17), and
[`std::midpoint`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/midpoint) and
[`std::lerp`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/lerp) (from C++20).

Adding these function templates to the Standard Library serves two main
purposes. First, it establishes common terminology (vocabulary) for these
operations, that is likely to be widely recognized. Second, and particularly in
the case of `std::midpoint` and `std::lerp`, it ensures the availability of high
quality implementations that
[avoid common pitfalls](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2019/p0811r3.html).

All of these operations are `constexpr`, meaning that they can be used both at
runtime and at compile time. The types that can be passed to them depend on the
specific operation; they all support floating point types, and `std::midpoint`
and `std::clamp` offer additional flexibility. Read on for the details.

### <code>std::clamp</code>

`std::clamp(x, min, max)` “clamps” x to the range [`min`, `max`]. More
explicitly, if `x` is already in the range `min` to `max` (inclusive) then
`std::clamp(x, min, max)` returns `x`, and for `x` outside of that range
`std::clamp` returns whichever of `min` or `max` is closest to `x`. This is
equivalent to `std::max(std::min(x, max), min)` except for being a more direct
way to express the intent (and much less of a puzzle for readers).

> Warning: While `std::clamp` returns a *reference*, code depending on that is
> subtle and unusual, and would warrant a comment to alert readers. It is easy
> to accidentally create a dangling reference by passing a temporary to
> `std::clamp` and binding the result to a temporary:
>
> <pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
> // `std::clamp(1, 3, 4)` returns a reference to a temporary int initialized
> // from `3`, which must not be used beyond the lifetime of the temporary.
> // See [Tip #101](/tips/101).
> const int& dangling = std::clamp(1, 3, 4);
> </pre>

`std::clamp` works for any type that can be compared with `<` (or with a
user-supplied comparator passed to `std::clamp(x, min, max, cmp`).

### <code>std::midpoint</code>

There are no surprises in what `std::midpoint` does: `std::midpoint(x, y)`
returns a point halfway between `x` and `y` (rounding towards `x` when `x` and
`y` are of an integral type).

`std::midpoint(x, y)` works for values `x`, `y` of any floating point or
integral type (not including `bool`). As a bonus, `std::midpoint(p, q)` also
works for pointers `p`, `q` into an array.

### <code>std::lerp</code>

The `lerp` in `std::lerp` is short for “linear interpolation”, and `std::lerp(x,
y, t)` returns a value some fraction `t` of the way from `x` to `y`. For
example, `std::lerp(x, y, 0)` returns `x`, `std::lerp(x, y, 1)` returns y, and
`std::lerp(x, y, 0.5)` can be simplified to `std::midpoint(x, y)`.

Note: In spite of the name, `std::lerp` can also be used for extrapolation if we
pass a value of `t` outside of the range `[0, 1]`. For example, `std::lerp(100,
101, -2)` evaluates to 98, and `std::lerp(100, 101, +2)` is 102.

`std::lerp` works on floating point types.

## Recommendations

1.  One of the main benefits of these library functions is that they provide a
    common vocabulary. As always, prefer to use these standard facilities
    instead of writing them from scratch.
1.  Prefer `std::midpoint(x, y)` over `std::lerp(x, y, 0.5)` when applicable.
1.  Avoid declaring a reference to the result of `std::clamp`.
