---
title: "Tip of the Week #197: Reader Locks Should Be Rare"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/197
type: markdown
order: "197"
---

Originally posted as TotW #197 on July 29, 2021

*By [Titus Winters](mailto:titus@cs.ucr.edu)*

Updated 2024-04-01

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/197](https://abseil.io/tips/197)


“Ah, how good it is to be among people who are reading.” - *Rainer Maria Rilke*

The `absl::Mutex` class has supported two styles of locking for many years now:

*   Exclusive locks, in which exactly one thread holds the lock.
*   Shared locks, which have two modes. If they are held “for writing” they use
    an exclusive lock, but they also have a different mode in which many threads
    can hold the lock “for reading.”

How can a shared lock be acceptable? Isn’t the whole point of having a lock to
gain exclusive access to an object? The perceived value in shared locks is when
we need read-only access to the underlying data/objects. Remember that we get
data races and API races when two threads access the same data without
synchronization, and at least one of those accesses is a write. If we use a
shared-lock when many threads only need to read data, and always use exclusive
locks when writing data, we can avoid contention among the readers and still
avoid data and API races.

To support this, `absl::Mutex` has both `Mutex::Lock()` (and
`Mutex::WriterLock()`, an alternate name for the same exclusive behavior) as
well as `Mutex::ReaderLock()`. From reading through those interfaces, you might
think that we should prefer `ReaderLock()` when we’re only reading from the data
protected by the lock.

In many cases you’d be wrong.

### ReaderLock Is Slow

`ReaderLock` inherently does more bookkeeping and requires more overhead than a
standard exclusive lock. As a result, in many cases using the more specialized
form (shared locks) is actually a performance loss, as we have to do quite a bit
more work in the lock machinery itself. This cost is minor in the absence of
contention, but `ReaderLock` underperforms `Lock` under contention for short
critical sections. Without contention, the value `ReaderLock` provides is less
significant in the first place.

Consider the logic in an exclusive lock vs. a shared lock. A shared lock
generally must also have an exclusive lock mode - if there are no writers, no
data race can occur, and thus there is no need for locking in the first place.
Shared locking is therefore inherently more complex, requiring checks on whether
other readers hold locks, or modifications to the (atomic) count of readers,
etc.

### When are Shared Locks Useful?

Shared locks are primarily a benefit when the lock is going to be held for a
comparatively long time and it's likely that multiple readers will concurrently
obtain the *shared* lock. For example, if you’re going to do a lot of work while
holding the lock (e.g. iterating over a large container, not just doing a single
lookup), then a shared locking scheme may be valuable. The dominant question is
not “am I writing to the data”, it’s “how long do I expect the lock to be held
by readers (compared to how long it takes to acquire the lock)?”

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp bad-code">
// This is bad - the amount of work done under the lock is insignificant.
// The added complexity of using reader locks is going to cost more in aggregate
// than the contention saved by having multiple threads able to call this
// function concurrently.
int Foo::GetElementSize() const {
  absl::ReaderMutexLock l(&lock_);
  return element_size_;
}
</pre>

Even when the amount of computation performed under a lock is larger, and reader
locks become more useful, we often find we have better special-case interfaces
to avoid contention entirely - see https://abseil.io/fast and
https://abseil.io/docs/cpp/guides/synchronization for more. RCU (“Read Copy
Update”) abstractions provide a particularly common solution here, making the
read path essentially free.

### What Should We Do?

Be on the lookout for use of `ReaderLock` - the overwhelming majority of uses of
it are actually a pessimization … but we can’t statically determine that
definitively to rewrite code to use exclusive locking instead. (Reasoning about
concurrency properties in C++ is still too hard for most refactoring work.)

If you spot `ReaderLock`, especially new uses of it, try to ask “Is the
computation under this lock often long?” If it’s just looking up a value in a
container, an exclusive lock is almost certainly a better solution.

In the end, profiling may be the only way to be sure - contention tracking is
particularly valuable here.
