---
title: "Tip of the Week #224: Avoid <code>vector.at()</code>"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/224
type: markdown
order: "224"
---

Originally posted as TotW #224 on August 24, 2023

*By [Titus Winters](mailto:titus@cs.ucr.edu)*

Updated 2024-01-24

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/224](https://abseil.io/tips/224)


There is no good use of `vector<T>::at()` in google3, and fairly few good uses
in other C++ environments. The same reasoning applies to `at()` on other
random-access sequences like `RepeatedPtrField` in protobuf, as well as to
`value()` on wrapper types like `optional<T>` and `absl::StatusOr<T>`.

## What Does <code>at()</code> Do?

The specification of `at(size_type pos)` is as follows:

> Returns a reference to the element at specified location `pos`, with bounds
> checking. If `pos` is not within the range of the container, an exception of
> type std::out_of_range is thrown.

This means we could view the contract of this method as two distinct behaviors:

-   Check whether `pos >= size()`, and if so then throw a `std::out_of_range`
    exception.
-   Otherwise, return the element at index `pos`.

Note: The specification does not directly address the case of code passing a
negative index, but `std::out_of_range` will be thrown for that case too –
because `size_type` is an *unsigned* integral type, a call to `at(-5)` will
yield a very large positive value for `pos`.

## When Would We Use <code>at()</code>?

Since the contract of `at()` depends on the bounds-checking logic, we can break
this into two cases: either we know by construction that the index is valid, or
we don't.

If we already know that the sequence is sufficiently large and the lookup will
succeed, the extra bounds check is overhead. Most `vector` accesses, for
instance, are as part of a loop from `0` to `size()` and we already know the
operation will succeed. Therefore, in cases where we already know the bounds
check will be successful, it's likely that we want the more common
`operator[]()`.

<pre class="prettyprint code"> {.bad}
for (int i = 0; i + 1 &lt; vec.size(); ++i) {
  ProcessPair(vec.at(i), vec.at(i + 1));
}
</pre>

becomes

<pre class="prettyprint code"> {.good}
for (int i = 0; i + 1  &lt; vec.size(); ++i) {
  ProcessPair(vec[i], vec[i + 1]);
}
</pre>

If we do **not** know that the sequence is sufficiently large, is throwing an
exception the right way to handle that? Usually not. In google3 builds, throwing
an exception will terminate the program, messily. Many (perhaps most) readers
won't necessarily spot an innocuously named method like `at()` as a process
termination risk.

<pre class="prettyprint code"> {.bad}
std::vector&lt;absl::string_view&gt; tokens = absl::StrSplit(user_string, ByChar(','));
LOG(INFO) &lt;&lt; "Got leading token " &lt;&lt; tokens.at(0);
</pre>

is probably better as

<pre class="prettyprint code"> {.good}
std::vector&lt;absl::string_view&gt; tokens = absl::StrSplit(user_string, ByChar(','));
if (tokens.empty()) {
  return absl::InvalidArgumentError("Invalid user_string, expected ','");
}
</pre>

or if aborting the program is preferable

<pre class="prettyprint code"> {.good}
std::vector&lt;absl::string_view&gt; tokens = absl::StrSplit(user_string, ByChar(','));
CHECK(!tokens.empty()) &lt;&lt; "Invalid user_string "
                       &lt;&lt; std::quoted(user_string)
                       &lt;&lt; ", expected at least one ','";
</pre>

So at least in a google3 context, none of the uses of `at()` are really useful —
for any given use case, there is a more preferred alternative.

## What About UB?

Unfortunately, reality is hardly so clean as "we know or we don't": we make
mistakes and code can change over time, invalidating originally correct
assumptions. Given that humans are fallible, we can *imagine* a use-case for
`at()`. Specifically, if we are completely consistent in using `at()` instead of
`operator[]`, we might ensure that even if we're crashing messily (*bad*), we
don't trigger [undefined behavior (UB)](/tips/labs/ub-and-you) (*worse*).

While we believe "avoid UB" is a very legitimate goal, we still don't endorse
the use of `at()`, specifically, because of its exception-entangled semantics,
discussed above. The ideal future solution is a hardened-by-default
`operator[]`, with compiler optimizations to remove bounds checking, when
provably safe. The `at()` method is a bad approximation of this solution.

Instead, we encourage users to stick with `operator[]` and reduce exposure to UB
by other means, including:

*   If your project can afford it, we recommend enabling bounds check in
    production using
    [HARDENING_ENABLE_SAFE_LIBCXX](http://go/cc_hardened_binary). Current
    measurements suggest the [macrobenchmark](https://abseil.io/fast/39) cost of
    this hardening is just barely statistically significant.
*   If you run your code with [ASAN][asan] you'll *also* get diagnostics if you
    access an element out of range.

In fact, your project is likely already relying on some of these protections!

## What About Maps?

In [Tip #202](/tips/202) we discussed the use of `at()` on associative
containers like maps and sets. In general, the error-handling logic above
applies: it's likely the case that a missing key should be handled by logging or
returning an error, rather than messily crashing the process.

However, the "bounds checking" overhead logic is different for these containers.
In the `std::vector` case, the compute cost of doing the bounds check is similar
to the cost of doing the actual work (returning the indicated reference). For
associative containers, the "bounds check" equivalent is doing the (necessary)
lookup, whether that is tree traversal, hashing, etc.

Following that reasoning, we might use `at()` when we know the key is present
already (no exception throwing) but were unable to keep an iterator or
reference, so it is necessary to perform the lookup again. This is pretty rare:
see [Tip #132](/tips/132) for ways to avoid redundant map lookups.

In the end, there's some minor room for usage of `at()` in associative
containers. There is more room for nuance in those cases than there is for
`vector`.

## What About C++ With Exceptions?

In an exceptions-enabled environment, opinions may differ a bit more when it
comes to `at()`. It's still broadly the case that explicit bounds checking is
likely better performance (and harder to mess up) than relying on exceptions. An
argument could be made for defense-in-depth prevention of UB, but it's fairly
clear that the idiom is (and will continue to be) `operator[]()` rather than
`at()`.

Ideally, code should make as few assumptions as it can about the environment in
which it will work. Reasoning about code based on which toolchains will be used
to compile it is often fragile. For code that uses `at()` (or another
exception-based API) to be correct, it needs to be correct for two different
build modes: it must be acceptable to terminate the entire process *and* it must
be acceptable for code at a higher level to catch the exception and continue
execution, so the library code must preserve all invariants. In practice that
means that the code must be exception-safe *and* that it must be OK for any
out-of-bounds use of `at()` to terminate the process.

The best advice we can give about use of `at()` in an exception-enabled
environment is perhaps that it trades a reduction in potential UB for hidden and
often unnecessary error handling. That isn't always a clear tradeoff, but it
still seems unlikely to be commonly worth the cost.

## Closing Thoughts

When indexing into a container, be mindful of which case we are in: is the index
"correct by construction", or does the code need to detect and handle invalid
indexes? In both cases we can do better than using the exception-based
`std::vector<T>::at()` API.

Similar thinking applies to other exception-based APIs such as
`std::optional<T>::value()` and `absl::StatusOr<T>::value()` (See
[Tip #181](/tips/181)). For error handling in non-concurrent C++ code, prefer to
"look before you leap" – and then, having checked that things are in order,
avoid APIs that include their own checking.

[asan]: https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/AddressSanitizer
