---
title: "Tip of the Week #234: Pass by Value, by Pointer, or by Reference?"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/234
type: markdown
order: "234"
---

Originally posted as TotW #234 on August 29, 2024

*By [Steve Wang](mailto:wangsteve@google.com)*

Updated 2024-09-30

Quicklink: [abseil.io/tips/234](https://abseil.io/tips/234)


## Overview

Many programming languages, such as Java and Python, always access objects via
references, and functions that accept objects get their own reference to the
caller's object. Others, such as C and Go, allow you to explicitly specify
pointers to objects. C++ further allows you to choose whether to pass by value,
giving the called function a copy of the argument, or to pass by reference,
giving the called function access to the caller's object. This tip will
illustrate the various ways input-only function parameters are passed in C++ and
provide recommendations and caveats.

When we talk about passing by value, we explicitly mean that the language
ensures that the scope of the function call has an exclusive copy of its
argument[^elision]. Reassigning a new value to this variable does not mutate the
corresponding object in the caller's scope. However, invoking the argument's
methods may still mutate its underlying state.

Meanwhile, when we talk about passing by reference, we effectively bring the
object from the caller's scope into the current function's scope, and
reassignment will mutate the underlying object.

Passing by pointer has some similarities to passing by reference, yet is
technically a special case of pass-by-value, as the pointer itself is a value
that corresponds to the address of the underlying object (or a null pointer,
which refers to no object at all).

Consider the following:

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
void AddOneToValue(int x) {
  ++x;
}

void AddOneToReference(int& x) {
  ++x;
}

// Here, the pointer points at a "pointee"; we're adding one to the
// pointed-at object.
void AddOneToPointee(int* x) {
  ++*x;
}

...

int x = 5;
AddOneToValue(x);
// x is still 5.
AddOneToReference(x);
// x is now 6.
AddOneToPointee(&x);
// x is now 7.
</pre>

As a result, when writing functions in C++, the language makes us consider how
to pass parameters – should we pass by value, by pointer, by reference (if so,
which kind)?

## Why Do We Care About Passing by Value?

The astute reader might wonder what the issues are with always passing by
reference. First off, having unnecessary `const T&` (e.g., `Add(const int& a,
const int& b)`) adds visual clutter.

Second, in C++, as mentioned above, a reference is largely syntactic sugar for a
pointer[^const_ref], with the associated overhead of a memory lookup when we
want to use it unless the compiler is able to optimize that away. By passing
small types by value, we can pass them in registers instead of needing to store
them on the stack.

<pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
// Passing a small value by value, the compiler can avoid a stack allocation and
// pass it in a register.
int foo = 5;
Bar(foo);

// However, passing a small value by reference requires `foo` to be copied
// ("spilled") to the stack since you can't take the address of a register.
int foo = 5;
Bar(&foo);
</pre>

Of course, if the variable is already on the stack or heap (e.g., it's part of
an array) then this concern is irrelevant, but we should still prefer to pass by
value to avoid some cache misses and memory pressure if it's already loaded in a
register.

Regardless, references can further introduce concerns regarding
*aliasing*[^aliasing] – since the function does not have an exclusive copy of
the object, we have no guarantees that the object will remain unchanged
throughout the lifetime of the function, even if we have a reference-to-const
(which is only a promise that we will not mutate it *through that particular
parameter*).

## Why Do We Care About Passing by Reference?

On the opposite end of the spectrum, one might wonder why we don't just pass all
input parameters by value.

In C++, if you pass a variable by value, depending on how the function is called
the variable's value may be copied or moved (or neither)[^names]. On the other
hand, passing by reference (or pointer) allows you to refer to an existing
object and therefore avoid a copy entirely. So, in general, the larger an
object, the more you should prefer passing by reference.

Passing by value can have benefits as well as drawbacks from the perspective of
memory safety. On one hand, if you have the only copy of an object, then you
don't have to worry about other threads stomping over its state. On the other
hand, if you retain a reference to this object, once it goes out of scope, then
you have a use-after-free bug (just as for any other local variable).

## Guidelines

All of these rules apply equally. If none of them apply, a safe option is to
pass by reference-to-const for required parameters, and by pointer for optional
ones.

### Pass by Value

Passing by value can be more *efficient* in some cases (when the relevant types
are small enough that moving or copying them is more efficient than working via
pointers), and is helpful for conveying ownership (typically when the called
function wants to own the value, to move from it, or to otherwise modify its own
copy).

Specifically, the types listed below should usually be passed by value:

-   Numeric and enumeration types (including protobuf enums).
-   Smart pointers, when the called function takes ownership unconditionally.

Some additional types can be efficiently passed by value, as an optimization:

-   Types that provide an efficient move constructor, **only if the called
    function needs its own copy of the value**. Examples include
    `std::vector<T>`, `std::string`, `absl::flat_hash_map<T>` and other
    containers that don't store their contents inline[^proto_move].

    In these cases, you should pass by value, and `std::move` at the callsite
    when needed (or pass in a temporary which is subject to mandatory copy
    elision per [Tip #166](/tips/166)). See [Tip #117](/tips/117) for
    supplemental reading on copy elision and pass-by-value.

    Passing by value is especially common in a constructor that stores one of
    these types in a member variable.

    <pre class="prettyprint lang-cpp code">
    class Foo {
      public:
        // Here, we pass bar by reference and copy it into bar_.
        Foo(const std::vector&lt;int&gt;& bar) : bar_(bar) {}

        // But, we can instead use std::vector's move constructor to avoid
        // the expensive copy entirely, in some cases.
        Foo(std::vector&lt;int&gt; bar) : bar_(std::move(bar)) {}
      private:
        std::vector&lt;int&gt; bar_;
    };
    </pre>

-   `T`, where `sizeof(T) <= 16`[^abi] and `T` is either a scalar type such as
    an integer or a pointer type, or a class[^calls] such that:

    -   It has a non-deleted copy constructor or move constructor.
    -   All copy and move operations are trivial – one requirement is that they
        must either be omitted or explicitly defaulted ([Tip #131](/tips/131)).
    -   The destructor is trivial and non-deleted.

    For types that your team does not own[^hyrum], you should only rely on this
    behavior if they explicitly document that they should be passed by value,
    such as `spanner::Database` and `absl::Duration`.

-   `std::optional<T>`, where passing `T` by value applies.

    `std::optional<T>` adds some size overhead compared to `T`, which further
    limits the types that can be passed by value efficiently. So, for instance,
    `std::optional<std::span<U>>` and `std::optional<absl::string_view>` are too
    big, as each of these wrapped types is 16 bytes before accounting for
    `std::optional`'s overhead.

    If `sizeof(std::optional<T>) > 16`, or if `T` has a nontrivial copy
    constructor, then prefer passing `absl::Nullable<const T*>`
    ([Tip #163](/tips/163)), and use a null pointer to represent the case that
    would otherwise be captured by `std::nullopt`.

    Note that [Tip #163](/tips/163) applies here – if all callers will always
    have a `std::optional<T>`, then you may pass by `const&`.

    Do not use this idiom with smart pointers or other types that have a
    representation for "no value". For instance, do not write
    `std::optional<std::unique_ptr<U>>`; instead, prefer to use
    `std::unique_ptr<U>` directly, and pass a null pointer to represent "no
    value".

### Pass by Reference or by Pointer

Note: If an argument `x` in a call `f(x)` is required to outlive the function
call,
[do not pass it by reference](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Inputs_and_Outputs).

The types listed below should usually be passed by reference (for required
parameters) or by pointer (for optional parameters).

-   Smart pointers (e.g., `std::unique_ptr<T>`) where you don't want to transfer
    ownership: dereference the smart pointer to pass `const T&` if the
    pointed-at value is always known (and required) to be non-null; else pass
    `absl::Nullable<const T*>` ([Tip #188](/tips/188)).

    In cases of shared ownership[^shared_ptr] where you only *sometimes* want to
    take ownership, you may want to pass a reference to the `std::shared_ptr` to
    avoid the slight overhead of updating reference counts.

-   Containers that store their contents inline, e.g., `std::array<T, N>` and
    `absl::InlinedVector<T, N>`.

    While `std::array<T, N>` can be efficient to pass by value if `sizeof(T) * N
    <= 16`, `absl::InlinedVector<T, N>` has a non-trivial copy constructor and
    thus will never be passed in a register.

-   Types with non-trivial copy constructors, where you don't intend to use move
    semantics.

-   Protocol buffers.

    You might think that the `Duration` type defined by

    <pre class="prettyprint code">
    edition = "2023";

    message Duration {
      int64 seconds = 1;
      int32 nanos = 2;
    }
    </pre>

    only contains an `int64` (8 bytes) and an `int32` (4 bytes) and is therefore
    12 bytes (padded out to 16 bytes), but that's not correct because protobufs
    may have a vtable pointer (8 bytes) or other metadata. Additionally, you
    shouldn't pass protos by value by default (even if they don't have many
    fields) because they do not promise that they can be trivially copied (and
    in practice they usually cannot).

### Pass a View (by Value)

For some types, a corresponding *view* type -- a type that gives read-only
access to the underlying data, and might support various different underlying
types -- can be a good way to accept inputs to a function that does not need its
own copy of those inputs.

-   For functions accepting a string argument, whether as `std::string`,
    `absl::string_view`, or `const char*`, defining the parameter as an
    `absl::string_view` is efficient and supports all of these inputs types (see
    [Tip #179](/tips/179)).
-   For functions accepting a `std::vector<T>`, defining the parameter as an
    `absl::Span<const T>` is more efficient and more flexible (see
    [Tip #93](/tips/93)), though using `const std::vector<T>&` can be a
    reasonable choice if constraints make `absl::Span` impractical.

-   For functions that accept a callable object, such as a lambda, we can choose
    between defining a function parameter as `const Fn&` (where `Fn` is a
    template parameter) or as a type-erased callable such as `absl::FunctionRef`
    (see [Tip #145](/tips/145)).

## Closing Words

While passing function parameters by `const&` is a good default choice, there
are plenty of cases where it's not the best option. The guidelines in this tip
can help to weigh the relevant factors and design safe and efficient APIs.

We want to emphasize that they are just guidelines, though, and if you have good
reason to deviate from these (e.g., benchmarking or profiling identifies
potential performance gains), we encourage you to do so (and to document your
rationale for the next reader).

[^abi]: In typical Google production environments, namely x86-64 Linux. See
    section 3.2.3 of the
    [ELF x86-64 ABI spec](https://gitlab.com/x86-psABIs/x86-64-ABI).
    [On Windows](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/x64-calling-convention?view=msvc-170#parameter-passing),
    only types that are 8 bytes or fewer are passed in registers.
[^aliasing]: In best-case scenarios, pointer aliasing prevents the compiler from
    making certain optimizations. In worst-case scenarios, pointer
    aliasing can result in violated preconditions, logic bugs, and
    buffer overflows.
[^calls]: Formally, this class must not be "non-trivial for the purpose of
    calls". This is very similar, but not quite identical, to a trivially
    copyable class in C++. See the
    [ABI specification](https://itanium-cxx-abi.github.io/cxx-abi/abi.html)
    for the formal definition of this term.
[^const_ref]: const-references are somewhat more complex – for one, they can
    bind to temporaries. Further, references cannot be null, so we
    generally recommend passing references instead of pointers for
    required input parameters that don't need to outlive the function
    call.
[^elision]: This does not necessarily mean that the function creates a separate
    copy of its argument, as [copy elision](/tips/166) may have taken
    place.
[^hyrum]: While it can be more efficient to pass small types by value, you may
    accidentally make it harder to add new fields to those types or
    otherwise change the internal representation (see go/hyrums-law),
    since you're adding an implicit dependency on the size of the type, as
    well as on the constructors and destructors that it defines.
[^names]: To a first approximation, this results in a copy when you pass in a
    named object (such as a non-reference stack variable or data member).
    [Tip #166](/tips/166) covers this in more detail.
[^proto_move]: Protocol buffers also define a move constructor that is usually
    comparable to a shallow copy -- the exception is if you're moving
    between two messages that live on different arenas, or between a
    heap-allocated message and an arena-allocated message, in which
    case it is comparable to a deep copy.
    go/proto-cpp-arena-allocation#message-class-methods has more
    details.
[^shared_ptr]: As stated in the
    [style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Ownership_and_Smart_Pointers),
    shared ownership should only be used with good reason, and not as
    a way to avoid thinking about object lifetimes.
